
5.1.1     U-47700
Substance identification
Chemically, U-47700 is 3,4-dichloro-N-(2-dimethylamino-cyclohexyl)-N-
methyl-benzamide. U-47700 has two chiral centres resulting in four isomers; cis-
and trans-conformations, each of which has two enantiomers (cis, 1R,2R, and
1S,2S; trans, 1R,2S and 1S,2R).

Previous review
U-47700 has not previously been pre-reviewed or critically reviewed by the
Committee. A direct critical review was proposed based on information brought
to the attention of WHO that U 47700 is clandestinely manufactured, poses a risk
to public health and society, and has no recognized therapeutic use by any Party.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
The closest controlled substance that is structurally related to U-47700 is AH-
7921, and they are structural isomers of one another. AH-7921 is controlled as a
Schedule I drug under the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961, as amended
by the 1972 Protocol, in 2015. U-47700 binds and has functional activity at the
mu opioid receptor and at the delta opioid receptor. It has antinociceptive activity
in mice, with about 7.5 times the potency of morphine. Similar to morphine,
case reports indicate that it produces pinpoint pupils, respiratory depression,
cyanosis and depressed consciousness that is clinically reversible with naloxone.
Confirmed fatalities (>15) associated with the use of U-47700 have occurred in
Europe and in the United States.

Dependence potential
No controlled laboratory studies in animals or humans have been reported
regarding the dependence effects of U-47700. Users, however, report the
induction of tolerance and the emergence of withdrawal signs and symptoms
upon discontinuing use of U-47700, suggestive of physical dependence.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
No controlled laboratory studies in animals or humans have been reported
regarding the abuse potential of U-47700. U-47700, however, is aggressively
marketed on the Internet, often as a heroin or an oxycodone substitute, as itself, or
in combination with other drugs. There have also been many seizures in Europe
and in North America, some single seizures involving hundreds of pills. Users
report administering U-47700 via the oral, insufflation, intravenous and rectal
routes, and via an inhaler using a liquid solution. Some countries have placed
U-47700 under national control, and recently (14 November 2016) the United
States placed U-47700 under its Controlled Substances Act stating that this was
necessary to avoid an imminent hazard to public safety.

Therapeutic usefulness
Although investigated preclinically as an analgesic, U-47700 has no history
as a marketed medical product, nor are there any known current marketing
authorizations for it as a medicinal product.

Recommendation
U-47700 (3,4-dichloro-N-(2-dimethylamino-cyclohexyl)-N-methyl-benzamide)
is a compound liable to similar abuse and with similar ill effects to controlled
opioids such as morphine and AH-7921 that are included in Schedule I of the
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961. It has no recorded therapeutic use,
and its use has resulted in fatalities. There is sufficient evidence that it is being
or is likely to be abused so as to constitute a public health and social problem
warranting the placing of the substance under international control. Thus,
because it meets the required condition of similarity, it is recommended that
U-47700 be placed in Schedule I of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs,
1961, as consistent with Article 3, paragraph 3 (iii) of that Convention in that the
substance is liable to similar abuse and productive of similar ill effects to drugs
in Schedule I.

5.1.2     Butyrfentanyl (butyrylfentanyl)
Substance identification
Chemically, butyrfentanyl is N-phenyl-N-[1-(2-phenylethyl)-4-piperidinyl]
butanamide.

Previous review
Butyrfentanyl has not been previously pre-reviewed or critically reviewed by the
Committee. A direct critical review was proposed based on information brought
to the attention of WHO that butyrfentanyl is clandestinely manufactured, poses
a risk to public health and society, and has no recognized therapeutic use by any
Party.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Butyrfentanyl contains a carboxamide group that can be easily hydrolysed
in strong acid or strong base when heated and subsequently converted by
condensation into another carboxamide such as fentanyl and to other fentanyls.
Fentanyl is a Schedule I drug under the UN Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs,
1961. Similar to morphine, butyrfentanyl binds and has functional activity at
the mu opioid receptor and produces antinociceptive activity in chemical and
thermal assays in mice, with a potency about 1.5 times that of morphine and 30
times less than that of fentanyl. Case studies report clinical features that include
typical opioid symptoms such as respiratory depression, apnoea and loss of
consciousness, and one report indicated responsiveness to naloxone.

Dependence potential
Butyrfentanyl demonstrates cross-dependency in the morphine-dependent
rhesus monkey. There are no reports of controlled studies of physical dependence
or cross-dependency in human subjects.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
There are no known reports of controlled studies of abuse potential in humans
or laboratory animals. Butyrfentanyl, however, is actively sold through Internet
websites. It has been associated with several drug seizures, and with fatal and
non-fatal intoxications both in Europe and the United States. Current estimates of
use are likely to be underestimates because butyrfentanyl is not included in most
drug screens. Routes of administration include insufflation, rectal, intravenous
and sublingual use. Re-dosing is apparently common.

Therapeutic usefulness
There are no known approved therapeutic applications for butyrfentanyl.

Recommendation
Butyrfentanyl (N-phenyl-N-[1-(2-phenylethyl)-4-piperidinyl]butanamide) is a
compound liable to similar abuse and with similar ill effects to controlled opioids
such as morphine and fentanyl that are included in Schedule I of the Single
Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961. It can also be converted into fentanyl. It
has no recorded therapeutic use and its use has resulted in fatalities. There is
sufficient evidence that it is being or is likely to be abused so as to constitute a
public health and social problem warranting the placing of the substance under
international control. Thus, because it meets either of the required conditions of
similarity or convertibility, it is recommended that butyrfentanyl be placed in
Schedule I of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961, as consistent with
Article 3, paragraph 3 (iii) of that Convention, in that the substance is liable to
similar abuse and productive of similar ill effects to drugs in Schedule I.

5.1.3     4-Methylethcathinone (4-MEC)
Substance identification
Chemically, 4-methylethcathinone (4-MEC) is 2-(ethylamino)-1-(4-
methylphenyl)propan-1-one. 4-MEC has a chiral centre giving rise to an
enantiomeric pair of (S)-4-MEC and (R)-4-MEC isomers.

Previous review
A critical review report on 4-MEC was discussed in June 2014 at the thirty-
sixth meeting of the WHO ECDD. The Committee recommended that 4-MEC
not be placed under international control at that time due to insufficiency of
data regarding dependence, abuse and risks to public health, but be kept under
surveillance. 4-MEC continues to appear as a psychostimulant with monoamine
transporter activity with indications of abuse liability. New data that had emerged
from in vitro and in vivo studies since the thirty-sixth ECDD meeting prompted
the current critical review.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
4-MEC has a homologue, mephedrone (4-methylmethcathinone), which is
listed as a Schedule II substance under the 1971 United Nations Convention on
Psychotropic Substances. Similar to controlled psychostimulants, 4-MEC elevates
extracellular neurotransmitter levels, most notably, dopamine, norepinephrine
(noradrenaline) and serotonin. Also, in rodents, 4-MEC increases locomotor
activity and produces sensitization, fully substitutes for the discriminative
stimulus effects of cocaine and (in one of two reports) also of methamphetamine,
establishes conditioned place preference, and reduces thresholds of intracranial
self-stimulation. User reports of negative effects associated with 4-MEC mention
excessive sweating, nausea, vomiting, jaw clenching, heart palpitations, loss
of sight and migraine. The number of case reports that demonstrate a causal
relationship between 4-MEC consumption and fatal intoxication is limited. This
profile is consistent with amphetamine-like effects and it is likely that 4-MEC
would produce adverse effects consistent with those associated with amphetamine.

Dependence potential
No controlled laboratory studies of the dependence potential of 4-MEC in animal
or human subjects have been reported. Urge to re-dose when using 4-MEC was
considered weak and short-lived with low incidence of negative after-effects
(compared to mephedrone), although users with a history of synthetic cathinone
use and less potent experiences with 4-MEC reported higher and more frequent
dosing.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
The ability of 4-MEC to occasion the discriminative stimulus effects of cocaine,
and at least in one study, methamphetamine, suggests the ability to produce
their subjective effects and associated abuse potential. 4-MEC’s ability to induce
conditioned place preference and reduce intracranial self-stimulation thresholds,
and to increase locomotor activity and produce sensitization to it, is consistent
with this prediction. Controlled studies on the abuse potential of 4-MEC have
not been conducted in humans. 4-MEC has been detected worldwide and is
marketed as a “research chemical”; it has also been detected as a constituent in
branded products available for purchase via the Internet and from brick-and-
mortar shops. Responses to the UNODC questionnaire on NPS (up to 2012)
revealed that 4-MEC was ranked fourth with regard to numbers of reports
received. User reports suggest that 4 MEC produces euphoria, a sense of well-
being and psychostimulant effects. A survey of a group of injecting drug users
of NPS reported that 4-MEC was injected more often per day compared to what
might be expected from heroin use. A number of countries in various regions
have placed 4-MEC under national control.

Therapeutic usefulness
There are no known approved therapeutic applications for 4-MEC.

Recommendation
The Committee considered that the degree of risk to public health and society
associated with the abuse of 4-MEC (2-(ethylamino)-1-(4-methylphenyl)propan-
1-one) is substantial. Therapeutic usefulness has not been recorded. It recognized
that 4-MEC has similar abuse and similar ill-effects to substances in Schedule
II of the UN Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971. The Committee
considered that there is sufficient evidence that 4-MEC is being or is likely to
be abused so as to constitute a public health and social problem warranting the
placing of the substance under international control. As per the Guidance on the
WHO review of psychoactive substances for international control (2), higher regard
was accorded to the substantial public health risk than to the lack of therapeutic
usefulness. The Committee recommended that 4-MEC be placed in Schedule II
of the UN Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971.

5.1.4    3-Methylmethcathinone (3-methyl-N-methylcathinone;
       3-MMC)
Substance identification
Chemically, 3-MMC is 2-(methylamino)-1-(3-methylphenyl)propan-1-one.
3-MMC contains a chiral centre at the C-2 carbon of the propane side chain, so
two enantiomers exist: (R)-3-MMC and (S)-3-MMC.

Previous review
3-MMC has not previously been pre-reviewed or critically reviewed. A direct
critical review was proposed based on information brought to the attention of
WHO that 3-MMC is clandestinely manufactured, poses a serious risk to public
health and society, and has no recognized therapeutic use by any Party.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
3-MMC is a positional isomer of 4-methylmethcathinone (4-MMC, mephedrone),
which is a Schedule II substance under the Convention on Psychotropic Substances
of 1971. 3-MMC, however, is not readily converted into 4-MMC. There has
been one controlled animal pharmacological study of 3-MMC. Data from case
reports (including clinically described intoxications) and user reports indicate
that 3-MMC displays similar properties to mephedrone and amphetamines.
Adverse effects following its use have included tachycardia, agitation, reduced
level of consciousness, dilated pupils, hallucinations, diaphoresis, seizures and
hyperthermia. Users have also reported insomnia, difficulties in concentrating,
and tingling in the arms and legs. Hospitalizations have been reported, with a
few being due to 3-MMC use alone. Fatalities involving polydrug abuse in which
3-MMC was detected have been reported, but its toxicological significance was
low or unclear.

Dependence potential
No controlled studies on dependence potential of 3-MMC have been conducted
in humans or laboratory animals.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
No controlled laboratory studies of abuse liability have been conducted in animals
or humans. In response to the WHO questionnaire for review of psychoactive
substances, several countries reported abuse of 3-MMC, as a recreational drug,
for its psychoactive properties. Most reports noted that the negative impact
on health originating from consumption was substantial. In one country that
administered a self-reporting questionnaire, 67.9% of respondents indicated they
had tried 3-MMC, and 26.8% indicated that they had been using it for more
than one year. In a study in another country, 66 instances of driving under the
influence of drugs (DUID) involved 3-MMC; in 19 of these cases, 3-MMC was
determined to be the only substance present. 3-MMC is generally administrated
by insufflation, inhalation, orally or by injection. User-reported effects include
production of euphoria, excitement, feelings of empathy, stimulation and
enhanced awareness. Some users have reported repeated use over long periods
(more than 40 lifetime occasions of use). 3-MMC is a controlled substance in
several countries in various regions.

Therapeutic usefulness
3-MMC has no known medical applications.

Recommendation
The Committee deliberated at length regarding the information pertinent to the
degree of risk to public health and society associated with the abuse of 3-MMC
(2-(methylamino)-1-(3-methylphenyl)propan-1-one). The Committee decided
that the information available, and the ensuing discussions, were inadequate to
enable a consensus and a confident recommendation regarding the scheduling of
3-MMC. As per paragraph 59 of the Guidance on the WHO review of psychoactive
substances for international control (2), and as supported by its procedural reference
to the thirty-fourth report of the WHO Expert Committee on Drug Dependence
(11), “in cases where additional information concerning the substance under
review is required, the Committee may decide that it will reach a final opinion at
a subsequent meeting. ... then it should request another critical review in order
to refer the matter to a subsequent Expert Committee.” In accordance with these
guidelines, the Committee requested that the Secretariat arrange another critical
review of 3-MMC at a subsequent meeting of the Expert Committee.

5.1.5     Ethylone (3,4-methylenedioxy-N-ethylcathinone; bk-MDEA;
        MEDEC)
Substance identification
Chemically, ethylone is 1-(2H-1,3-benzodioxol-5-yl)-2-(ethylamino)propan-1-
one. It is a chiral compound with isomers, and its hydrochloride salt can exist in
two conformations (polymorphs) at the C–C bond linking the side chain to the
aromatic ring.

Previous review
Ethylone has not previously been pre-reviewed or critically reviewed. A direct
critical review was proposed based on information brought to the attention of
WHO that ethylone is clandestinely manufactured, poses a serious risk to public
health and society, and has no recognized therapeutic use by any Party.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Ethylone can be considered a slight chemical modification of methylone
(3,4-methylenedioxymethcathinone), which is included in Schedule II of the
Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971. However, it would be likely
to be inefficient to intentionally synthesize ethylone to convert it to methylone.
Similar to cocaine-like drugs, ethylone has relatively nonselective monoamine
uptake inhibition at dopamine, serotonin and norepinephrine transporters. It
substitutes completely for the methamphetamine and cocaine discriminative
stimuli in rats suggesting that it would be likely to produce their subjective
effects. Reported clinical effects (often observed when accompanied by other
drugs) include impaired driving, slurred speech, bloodshot watery eyes, dilated
pupils, involuntary muscle movements and elevated pulse and blood pressure.

Dependence potential
No controlled studies in humans or laboratory animals regarding the potential
physical dependence effects of ethylone have been reported.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
Results of controlled laboratory studies in animals or humans characterizing
the abuse potential of ethylone have not been reported. Seizures of ethylone,
or its detection in biosamples, have been reported from several countries and
regions. Within the first six months of 2015, ethylone had become the 12th most
confiscated drug in the United States. Ethylone is aggressively marketed on the
Internet and has been sold as a bath salt, plant food and cleaning product. Users
report administering the drug via the oral, rectal, insufflation, sublingual and
intravenous routes. Ethylone has been associated with deaths (more than eight
reports). Several countries in different regions have imposed regulatory controls
over ethylone.

Therapeutic usefulness
Ethylone was originally patented for its potential antidepressant and
antiparkinsonian properties in 1995, but no currently approved medical
applications exist for it.

Recommendation
The Committee considered that the degree of risk to public health and society
associated with the abuse of ethylone (1-(2H-1,3-benzodioxol-5-yl)-2-
(ethylamino)propan-1-one) is substantial. Therapeutic usefulness has not been
recorded. It recognized that ethylone has similar abuse and similar ill-effects to
substances in Schedule II of the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971.
The Committee considered that there is sufficient evidence that ethylone is being
or is likely to be abused so as to constitute a public health and social problem
warranting the placing of the substance under international control. As per the
Guidance on the WHO review of psychoactive substances for international control
(2), higher regard was accorded to the substantial public health risk than to the
lack of therapeutic usefulness. The Committee recommended that ethylone be
placed in Schedule II of the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971.

5.1.6     Pentedrone (α-methylaminovalerophenone)
Substance identification
Chemically, pentedrone is 2-(methylamino)-1-phenylpentan-1-one. It has a
chiral centre giving rise to two stereoisomers, (S)- and (R)-pentedrone.

Previous review
Pentedrone has not been previously pre-reviewed or critically reviewed by the
Committee. A direct critical review was proposed based on information brought
to WHO’s attention that pentedrone is clandestinely manufactured, poses a
serious risk to public health and society, and has no recognized therapeutic use
by any Party.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Pentedrone is a substituted phenethylamine derivative that belongs to the class of
cathinones, many of which are controlled under the Convention on Psychotropic
Substances of 1971. It is unlikely that pentedrone could easily be converted into
an existing controlled substance. Pentedrone binds to the dopamine and to the
noradrenergic transporters and inhibits dopamine and noradrenergic uptake, but
binds poorly to the serotonergic transporter and does not meaningfully inhibit
serotonergic uptake. It induces climbing behaviour, increases locomotor activity
and produces conditioned place preference in mice, and maintains intravenous
self-administration in rats. These in vitro and in vivo effects are consistent with
a profile similar to an abused stimulant such as methamphetamine. Importantly,
it generalizes to cocaine and to methamphetamine in rat discrimination
tests, suggesting that it can produce their subjective effects and has an abuse
liability similar to these drugs. Non-fatal intoxications have been reported, and
pentedrone has been associated with several DUID cases, although typically
accompanied by other drugs. Responses to the WHO questionnaire for review
of psychoactive substances for the thirty-eighth meeting of the ECDD indicated
that the adverse effects experienced by people who present with pentedrone
intoxication at emergency departments include impaired consciousness,
tachycardia, hypotension, nausea, vertigo, hallucinations, high body temperature
and sweating. Users of pentedrone report MDMA-like stimulating effects, such
as euphoria, openness and increased sociability and sexual drive.
         Pentedrone has been associated with at least six fatalities, although other
drugs were present in each case.

Dependence potential
No controlled studies in humans or laboratory animals regarding the potential
physical dependence effects of pentedrone have been reported.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
Pentedrone has been detected in commercial products or in biosamples in Canada,
several European countries and in the United States. Hundreds of kilograms
of pentedrone have been seized in the European Union alone. User reports
indicate that pentedrone is administered via the oral, insufflation, inhalation and
intravenous routes. Several countries in different regions have placed pentedrone
under national control.

Therapeutic usefulness
No therapeutic or medical use has been described for pentedrone.

Recommendation
The Committee considered that the degree of risk to public health and society
associated with the abuse of pentedrone (2-(methylamino)-1-phenylpentan-1-
one) is substantial. Therapeutic usefulness has not been recorded. It recognized
that pentedrone has similar abuse and similar ill-effects to substances in Schedule
II of the UN Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971. The Committee
considered that there is sufficient evidence that pentedrone is being or is likely to
be abused so as to constitute a public health and social problem warranting the
placing of the substance under international control. As per the Guidance on the
WHO review of psychoactive substances for international control (2), higher regard
was accorded to the substantial public health risk than to the lack of therapeutic
usefulness. The Committee recommended that pentedrone be placed in Schedule
II of the UN Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971.

5.1.7     Ethylphenidate (EPH)
Substance identification
Chemically, ethylphenidate is ethyl phenyl(piperidin-2-yl)acetate.

Previous review
Ethylphenidate has not previously been pre-reviewed or critically reviewed. A
direct critical review was proposed based on information brought to the attention
of WHO that ethylphenidate is clandestinely manufactured, poses a serious risk
to public health and society, and has no recognized therapeutic use by any Party.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Ethylphenidate is a structural analogue of methylphenidate, which is controlled
as a Schedule II substance under the UN Convention on Psychotropic Substances
of 1971. Ethylphenidate can be converted into methylphenidate and vice
versa. Ethylphenidate is also produced as a metabolite from the co-ingestion
of methylphenidate and alcohol (ethanol), and it has been suggested as one
determinant of co-abuse of these substances. Ethylphenidate is a selective and
potent dopamine uptake inhibitor. It is more potent than cocaine in inhibiting
dopamine uptake, and also more selective than cocaine for the dopamine relative
to the noradrenergic or serotonergic transporters. Similar to psychostimulants, it
increases locomotor activity in rodents and can induce stereotypies. Ethylphenidate
has clinical effects typical of amphetamine-like stimulants, including tachycardia,
hypertension, dilated pupils, palpitations, fever, anxiety, agitation, paranoia and
tremor. Ethylphenidate use has been associated with deaths due to mixed drug
toxicity, and in one documented instance, ethylphenidate alone was detected.

Dependence potential
No controlled studies in humans or laboratory animals regarding the potential
physical dependence effects of ethylphenidate have been reported. One brief case
study has been published describing an individual who developed dependence
on ethylphenidate purchased from the Internet. The subject had previously been
dependent on cannabis, heroin/morphine and had occasionally used stimulants.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
Ethylphenidate is sold over the Internet and discussed on drug-user websites, and
has been identified in confiscated material. Routes of administration reported
by users include nasal insufflation, oral, anal, vapour inhalation and intravenous
injection. Users report an immediate and intense rush of pleasurable stimulation,
which is characterized by alertness and a general mood lift. Other effects reported
include increased self-confidence, improved ability to focus and concentrate, and
enhanced social interaction and social skills. The pro-social effects appear similar
to those reported by users of MDMA. Users on Internet forums report tolerance
to some of its effects, leading to use of a higher drug dose to achieve the same
effect and also describe a strong urge to re-dose. Ethylphenidate has been placed
under national control in several countries in different regions.

Therapeutic usefulness
There are currently no known therapeutic applications for ethylphenidate.

Recommendation
The Committee considered that the degree of risk to public health and society
associated with the abuse of ethylphenidate (ethyl phenyl(piperidin-2-yl)acetate)
is substantial. Therapeutic usefulness has not been recorded. It recognized that
ethylphenidate has similar abuse and similar ill-effects to substances in Schedule
II of the UN Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971. The Committee
considered that there is sufficient evidence that ethylphenidate is being or is likely
to be abused so as to constitute a public health and social problem warranting the
placing of the substance under international control. As per the Guidance on the
WHO review of psychoactive substances for international control (2), higher regard
was accorded to the substantial public health risk than to the lack of therapeutic
usefulness. The Committee recommended that ethylphenidate be placed in
Schedule II under the UN Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971.

5.1.8     Methiopropamine (MPA)
Substance identification
Chemically, methiopropamine is N-methyl-1-(thiophen-2-yl)propan-2-amine. It
has a chiral centre with two enantiomers.

Previous review
Methiopropamine was previously critically reviewed by the Committee
at its thirty-sixth meeting. Owing to the insufficiency of data regarding
dependence, abuse and risks to public health, the Committee recommended that
methiopropamine not be placed under international control at that time but be
kept under surveillance. Subsequent data collected from the literature and from
different countries indicating that this substance may cause substantial harm and
that it has no medical use warranted an updated critical review.
         Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Methiopropamine is a thiophene analogue of methamphetamine, but is not
readily converted into other controlled substances. It increases the synaptic levels
of dopamine and noradrenaline, an effect similar to that of methamphetamine.
Also similar to methamphetamine, it increases locomotor activity and induces its
sensitization in mice. Adverse effects reported following administration include
tachycardia, anxiety, panic attacks, perspiration, headache, nausea, difficulty in
breathing, vomiting, difficulty urinating and sexual dysfunction. Case reports
indicate that methiopropamine induces palpitations, chest tightness, anxiety,
nausea, vomiting and visual hallucinations. Methiopropamine has been associated
with 62 deaths; in at least 14 of these it was thought to have contributed to death
even though other drugs were present. One death was thought to be solely related
to methiopropamine use.

Dependence potential
No controlled studies in humans or laboratory animals regarding the potential
physical dependence effects of methiopropamine have been reported.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
Methiopropamine is sold on Internet websites as a “research chemical” or in
branded products, predominantly in powder form. Methiopropamine abuse has
been reported in many countries in different regions. Users report administering
methiopropamine by insufflation, inhalation or the oral route. Case reports
and user reports indicate that methiopropamine displays similar properties to
methamphetamine, including stimulation, alertness and increase of focus and
energy as well as talkativeness. Methiopropamine has been placed under national
control in a number of countries in different regions.

Therapeutic usefulness
There are currently no known therapeutic applications for methiopropamine.

Recommendation
The Committee considered that the degree of risk to public health and society
associated with the abuse of methiopropamine (N-methyl-1-(thiophen-2-yl)
propan-2-amine) is substantial. Therapeutic usefulness has not been recorded.
It recognized that methiopropamine has similar abuse and similar ill-effects to
substances in Schedule II of the UN Convention on Psychotropic Substances
of 1971. The Committee considered that there is sufficient evidence that
methiopropamine is being or is likely to be abused so as to constitute a public
health and social problem warranting the placing of the substance under
international control. As per the Guidance on the WHO review of psychoactive
substances for international control (2), higher regard was accorded to the
substantial public health risk than to the lack of therapeutic usefulness. The
Committee recommended that methiopropamine be placed in Schedule II under
the UN Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971.

5.1.9    MDMB-CHMICA
Substance identification
Chemically, MDMB-CHMICA is methyl N-{[1-(cyclohexylmethyl)-1H-indol-3-
yl]carbonyl}-3-methyl-L-valinate. MDMB-CHMICA has a chiral carbon in the
butanoic chain. Therefore, two stereoisomers exist: (S)-MDMB-CHMICA and
(R)-MDMB-CHMICA.

Previous review
MDMB-CHMICA has not been previously pre-reviewed or critically reviewed.
A direct critical review was proposed based on information brought to the
attention of WHO that MDMB-CHMICA is clandestinely manufactured, poses
a serious risk to public health and society, and has no recognized therapeutic
use by any Party.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
MDMB-CHMICA belongs to the group of synthetic cannabinoid receptor
agonists (SCRAs). MDMB-CHMICA has been shown to activate CB1 and CB2
cannabinoid receptors with preference for CB1 receptors over CB2 receptors.
MDMB-CHMICA is a highly efficacious compound with full agonist properties at
the CB1 receptor of the endocannabinoid system and with a greater potency than
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). Few reports of pharmacodynamic studies
in laboratory animals or humans are available that describe the pharmacology
of MDMB-CHMICA. Case reports and user reports indicate that MDMB-
CHMICA can induce acute toxicity and serious adverse events including nausea,
confusion, agitation, hallucinations, loss of consciousness, emesis, bradycardia
or tachycardia, spontaneous urination and defecation, respiratory insufficiency
and acidosis, hypothermia, mydriasis, hypoglycaemia and seizures including
tonic–clonic seizures. MDMB-CHMICA has been associated with 53 analytically
confirmed cases of serious adverse events in Europe and at least 28 deaths. While
in most instances other drugs (typically other SCRAs) were also present, MDMB-
CHMICA was the sole substance detected in some cases.

Dependence potential
No controlled studies in humans or laboratory animals regarding the potential
physical dependence or tolerance effects of MDMB-CHMICA have been
reported. Withdrawal-like symptoms associated with abstinence from MDMB-
CHMICA such as numbing of skin, cravings, mental fog, depressed mood, nausea
and abdominal pain have been reported by poison information centres and on
user websites. However, information on duration of use, pattern and amount
consumed over time was not available.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
There are no available reports of controlled studies involving the dependence
potential or abuse potential of MDMB-CHMICA in laboratory animals or
human subjects. Epidemiological reports of the incidence and prevalence of
MDMB-CHMICA use are also apparently unavailable. MDMB-CHMICA is
easily purchased on the Internet. It is sold online as a commercially branded legal
high or as a research chemical in various countries in different regions. More
than 3600 seizures or reports of detection of MDMB-CHMICA in 21 European
countries were reported in February 2016. In addition to the non-fatal and fatal
intoxications, analytically confirmed MDMB-CHMICA use has been related to
DUID and violent public behaviour. A number of countries in different regions
have placed MDMB-CHMICA under some level of national control.

Therapeutic usefulness
There are no known approved therapeutic applications for MDMB-CHMICA.

Recommendation
The Committee considered that the degree of risk to public health and society
associated with the abuse of MDMB-CHMICA (methyl N-{[1-(cyclohexylmethyl)-
1H-indol-3-yl]carbonyl}-3-methyl-L-valinate) is substantial. Therapeutic
usefulness has not been recorded. It recognized that MDMB-CHMICA has
similar abuse and similar ill-effects to substances in Schedule II of the UN
Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971. The Committee considered
that there is sufficient evidence that MDMB-CHMICA is being or is likely to
be abused so as to constitute a public health and social problem warranting the
placing of the substance under international control. As per the Guidance on the
WHO review of psychoactive substances for international control (2), higher regard
was accorded to the substantial public health risk than to the lack of therapeutic
usefulness. The Committee recommended that MDMB-CHMICA be placed in
Schedule II under the UN Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971.

5.1.10 5F-APINACA (5F-AKB-48)
Substance identification
Chemically, 5F-APINACA is
N-(adamantan-1-yl)-1-(5-fluoropentyl)-1H-indazole-3-carboxamide.

Previous review
5F-APINACA has not been previously pre-reviewed or critically reviewed by the
Committee. A direct critical review was proposed based on information brought
to the attention of WHO that 5F-APINACA is clandestinely manufactured, poses
a serious risk to public health and society, and has no recognized therapeutic use
by any Party.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
5F-APINACA (5F-AKB-48) is an analogue of APINACA (AKB-48) fluorinated
on the terminal carbon of the pentyl chain. 5F-APINACA binds to cannabinoid
CB1 and CB2 receptors with greater potency than THC and activates the CB1
receptor as a full agonist. 5F APINACA induces a prolonged release of dopamine
in the shell of the nucleus accumbens in awake mice. The CB1 cannabinoid
receptor antagonist/inverse agonist, AM251, blocks several in vivo effects
of 5F-APINACA in mice including its induced spontaneous and stimulated
aggressiveness, hypothermic effects and antinociceptive effects. The in vitro
binding and functional activity effects of 5F-APINACA, together with its in vivo
effects of hypothermia, and cataleptic and antinociceptive effects that are blocked
by AM251, are consistent with a THC-like cannabinoid compound. In contrast
to THC, high doses of 5F-APINACA induce spontaneous and handling-induced
convulsions, hyperreflexia and myoclonus in mice. Anxiety, paranoia, dry mouth,
headache and hyperthermia have been reported by users of 5F-APINACA on
blogs and forums. Recently, there have been a number of reports of non-fatal
intoxications involving 5F-APINACA in several countries. Adverse events
described in one analytically confirmed case report were agitation, tachycardia,
hypertension, twitching and chest pain.

Dependence potential
No controlled studies in humans or laboratory animals regarding the potential of
5F-APINACA to produce physical dependence or tolerance have been reported.
Users report acute physical withdrawal symptoms when attempting to reduce
use, including chest pains, chest pressure, tachycardia and palpitations, lower
extremity pain and spasms, nausea, sweating, diarrhoea and vomiting, which were
easily resolved by resuming smoking of 5F-APINACA. Psychological withdrawal
symptoms included insomnia (for more than 3 weeks), internal restlessness, urge
to re-dose, anxiety, agitation and paranoia.
         Following initial use of between one and four grams per day of herbal
mixtures containing 5F-APINACA, users report that the amount used increases
quickly. Compulsive re-dosing occurs despite recognition of loss of control,
awareness of tolerance and fears about adverse effects. The development of
thoughts about smoking and cravings first thing in the morning can occur rapidly
following initial patterns of use of 5F-APINACA.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
5F-APINACA is sold over the Internet. It has been detected in commercial or
seized products in several countries in different regions. One country reported
four DUID cases in which 5F-APINACA was detected. A number of countries
are directly controlling 5F-APINACA under national legislation.

Therapeutic usefulness
There are no known approved therapeutic applications for 5F-APINACA.

Recommendation
The Committee considered that the degree of risk to public health and
society associated with the abuse of 5F-APINACA (N-(adamantan-1-yl)-1-
(5-fluoropentyl)-1H-indazole-3-carboxamide) is substantial. Therapeutic
usefulness has not been recorded. It recognized that 5F-APINACA has similar
abuse and similar ill-effects to substances in Schedule II of the UN Convention
on Psychotropic Substances of 1971. The Committee considered that there is
sufficient evidence that 5F-APINACA is being or is likely to be abused so as
to constitute a public health and social problem warranting the placing of the
substance under international control. As per the Guidance on the WHO review
of psychoactive substances for international control (2), higher regard was accorded
to the substantial public health risk than to the lack of therapeutic usefulness. The
Committee recommended that 5F-APINACA be placed in Schedule II under the
UN Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971.

5.1.11 JWH-073
Substance identification
Chemically, JWH-073 is (1-butyl-1H-indol-3-yl)(1-naphthyl)methanone.

Previous review
During its thirty-sixth meeting, the WHO ECDD had discussed the critical
review report on JWH-073 and concluded that owing to the insufficiency of data
regarding dependence, abuse and risks to public health, JWH-073 should not be
placed under international control at that time but be kept under surveillance.
New information on its pharmacology and abuse potential warranted an update
of the critical review report for discussion at the thirty-eighth meeting of the
ECDD.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
JWH-073 is a homologue of JWH-018, which has been included in Schedule II of
the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971 since 2015. JWH-073 binds
to the CB1 and CB2 cannabinoid receptors and exhibits functional in vitro activity.
Several metabolites of JWH-073 also bind to the CB1 receptor. Similar to THC,
JWH-073 induces marked hypothermia in mice, increases the pain threshold
to both noxious mechanical and thermal stimuli, causes catalepsy, reduces
motor activity, and stimulates dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens in a
dose-dependent manner after systemic administration. In addition, it impairs
sensorimotor responses (visual, acoustic and tactile), causes seizures, myoclonia
and hyperreflexia, and promotes aggression. All these effects are fully prevented
by the selective CB1 receptor antagonist/inverse agonist, AM251. Repeated
administration of JWH-073 can induce tolerance to some of its effects, and
repeated administration of THC can produce cross-tolerance to some of the
effects of JWH-073. Users have reported anxiety, tremulousness and palpitations.
One user reported that she felt like she was “becoming psychotic”. Potency is
reported to be about half that of JWH-018. There have been several reports of
patients presenting with analytically confirmed JWH-073 consumption. These
patients exhibited some of the following signs: chest pain, tachycardia followed
by bradycardia, hypertension, agitation, paranoia and delusions, abdominal
cramps with nausea and vomiting, anxiety and tremulousness. However, these
reports typically involved the presence of other drugs and it is difficult to draw
a direct linkage between these adverse effects and JWH-073. No fatal cases in
which JWH-073 was detected in postmortem samples have been reported so far.

Dependence potential
No controlled studies in humans or laboratory animals regarding the potential
physical dependence or tolerance effects of JWH-073 have been reported.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
In rats and rhesus monkeys, JWH-073 produces the discriminative stimulus effects
of THC. Additionally, both THC and JWH-073 substitute for the discriminative
stimulus effects of JWH-018 in mice. Repeated administration of THC, however,
produces tolerance to its discriminative effects in rhesus monkeys, but not cross-
tolerance to JWH-073. In common with THC, JWH-073 is not self-administered
by rats.
         JWH-073 is sold over the Internet and has been sold as an additive in
commercially available “herbal mixtures”. It is sold as a powder or, when sold in
herbal mixtures, the chemical has been sprayed onto plant material (e.g. damiana
(Turnera diffusa)). Based on user reports and on the dosage forms offered, the
primary route of administration is inhalation either by smoking the herbal
mixture as a “joint” or using a vaporizer, bong or pipe. Abuse has been reported
in a number of countries in different regions. A number of countries in different
regions have placed JWH-073 under national control.

Therapeutic usefulness
There are no known approved therapeutic applications for JWH-073.

Recommendation
The available pharmacodynamic data related to JWH-073 (1-butyl-1H-indol-3-
yl)(1-naphthyl)methanone) demonstrate that this substance has the capacity to
produce some effects similar to its homologue, JWH-018, which is included in
Schedule II of the UN Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971. However,
the data currently available do not make it possible to establish a direct link
between JWH-073 abuse and appearance of public health and social problems
that would be a requirement for placing this substance under international
control. It is therefore recommended not to place JWH-073 under international
control but to continue to keep it under surveillance.

5.1.12		 XLR-11
Substance identification
Chemically, XLR-11 is [1-(5-fluoropentyl)-1H-indol-3-yl]
(2,2,3,3-tetramethylcyclopropyl)methanone.

Previous review
XLR-11 has not previously been pre-reviewed or critically reviewed. A direct
critical review was proposed based on information brought to WHO’s attention
that XLR-11 is clandestinely manufactured, poses a serious risk to public health
and society, and has no recognized therapeutic use by any Party.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Metabolites of XLR-11 include UR-144, a compound recognized for its own abuse
potential. XLR-11 binds to cannabinoid CB1 and CB2 receptors with greater affinity
than THC. XLR-11 acts as a full agonist at both these receptors. XLR-11 produces
all four effects in the THC tetrad test in the mouse, all components of which,
except catalepsy, are antagonized by the CB1 receptor antagonist, rimonabant.
Adverse effects associated with XLR-11 use include nausea, vomiting, low body
temperature, rigid muscle tone, back and abdominal pain, hypertension, slurred
speech, lack of convergence, and body and eyelid tremors. Of particular concern
was the reported association of XLR-11 use and acute kidney injury in users
who had been hospitalized. Analytically determined use of XLR-11 has been
confirmed in DUID cases. Confirmed presence of XLR-11 has been associated
with two deaths.

Dependence potential
No controlled studies in humans or laboratory animals regarding the potential
physical dependence or tolerance effects of XLR-11 have been reported.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
XLR-11 produces THC-like discriminative stimulus effects in mice and rats
indicating that it would be able to produce THC’s subjective effects and that it is
likely have a similar abuse potential. The discriminative stimulus effects of XLR-
11 are antagonized by rimonabant. XLR-11 is often sold in the form of herbal
mixtures designed for smoking purposes. XLR-11 has been encountered in
seizures or as an abused substance in a number of countries in different regions.
XLR-11 has been placed under national control in a number of countries and
different regions.

Therapeutic usefulness
There are no approved therapeutic applications for the clinical use of XLR-11.

Recommendation
The Committee considered that the degree of risk to public health and
society associated with the abuse of XLR-11 ([1-(5-fluoropentyl)-1H-indol-
3-yl](2,2,3,3-tetramethylcyclopropyl)methanone) is substantial. Therapeutic
usefulness has not been recorded. It recognized that XLR-11 has similar abuse
and similar ill-effects to substances in Schedule II of the UN Convention on
Psychotropic Substances of 1971, such as JWH-018 and AM-2201. The Committee
considered that there is sufficient evidence that XLR-11 is being or is likely to
be abused so as to constitute a public health and social problem warranting the
placing of the substance under international control. As per the Guidance on the
WHO review of psychoactive substances for international control (2), higher regard
was accorded to the substantial public health risk than to the lack of therapeutic
usefulness. The Committee recommended that XLR-11 be placed in Schedule II
under the UN Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971.
