
5.1.1     AB-CHMINACA
Substance identification
Chemically, AB-CHMINACA is N-[(2S)-1-Amino-3-methyl-1-oxobutan-2-yl]-
1-(cyclohexylmethyl)-1H-indazole-3-carboxamide. AB-CHMINACA contains
a chiral centre at the C-2 carbon of the oxobutan-2-yl side chain, so that two
enantiomers exist: (R)-AB-CHMINACA and (S)-AB-CHMINACA. Based on the
literature and the most likely precursors to be used, an (S)-configuration of the
stereocentre should be expected.

Previous review
AB-CHMINACA has not been previously pre-reviewed or critically reviewed.
A direct critical review was proposed based on information brought to WHO’s
attention that AB-CHMINACA is clandestinely manufactured, poses serious
risk to public health and society, and has no recognized therapeutic use by any
Party. Preliminary information collected from various sources indicated that this
substance may cause substantial harm and that it has no medical use.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
AB-CHMINACA binds to the cannabinoid CB1 receptor and demonstrates in
vitro functional agonist activity at the receptor site. It demonstrates activity in
all four components of the cannabinoid tetrad assay in mice (activity, catalepsy,
hypothermia and analgesia). Across these four components, AB-CHMINACA
is 11- to 58-fold more potent than tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) itself. These
effects of AB-CHMINACA can be antagonized by the cannabinoid CB1 receptor
antagonist, rimonabant. Users of AB-CHMINACA report cannabimimetic
effects after smoking the drug. AB-CHMINACA is not readily converted into
other internationally controlled substances.

Dependence potential
No controlled, experimental studies examining the dependence potential of AB-
CHMINACA in human subjects or laboratory animals were available.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
AB-CHMINACA produces complete, dose-dependent substitution for the
discriminative stimulus effects of THC in mice, and is 16 times more potent than
THC in this respect, suggesting that it can produce at least some of the subjective
and abuse potential effects of synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonists (SCRAs).
         AB-CHMINACA is sold and used as a “legal” substitute for cannabis.
It is most commonly smoked, or vaped through an e-cigarette. Between 2014
and 2016, seven acute cases of intoxication of people with confirmed exposure to
AB-CHMINACA were reported to the EMCDDA. Where details were provided,
the clinical features of the poisoning were typical of those reported for SCRAs.
Effects of AB-CHMINACA are consistent with those of SCRAs. They include
relaxation, euphoria, lethargy, depersonalization, distorted perception of time,
impaired motor performance, hallucinations, paranoia, confusion, fear, anxiety,
dry mouth, conjunctival injection (“red eyes”), tachycardia, and nausea and
vomiting. During a period of less than two weeks in which there was an outbreak
of SCRA usage in Florida, the presence of AB-CHMINACA or one of its predicted
metabolites, was confirmed in 15 of 21 cases. Some of the patients had acute
delirium and seizures. Between 2014 and 2017 a total of 31 deaths of people with
confirmed exposure to AB-CHMINACA were reported to the EMCDDA. In at
least seven cases, AB-CHMINACA was the cause of death or contributed to the
death. In a recent fatal case, in which it was the predominant SCRA present, use
of AB-CHMINACA was associated with non-cardiogenic pulmonary oedema.
    AB-CHMINACA has also been associated with several instances of impaired
driving reported from Hungary, Japan and the United States of America (USA).
For instance, in the USA in 2014, AB-CHMINACA was detected in 33 out of
58 people stopped for impaired driving who had tested positive for SCRAs. In
recognition of its abuse and associated harm, AB-CHMINACA has been placed
under national control in a number of countries in several different regions.

Therapeutic usefulness
There are currently no approved medical or veterinary uses of AB-CHMINACA.

Recommendation
AB-CHMINACA is a synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonist. It is clandestinely
manufactured and sold under a variety of brand names. It has cannabimimetic
effects that are more potent than those of THC, which is listed as a Schedule
II substance in accordance with the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of
1971. Its mode of action suggests the potential for dependence and likelihood
of misuse. There is evidence of an increase in the number of people using AB-
CHMINACA in many countries and of fatal and nonfatal cases. This substance
causes substantial harm and has no therapeutic usefulness. AB-CHMINACA
shows similar abuse and similar ill effects to other SCRAs already scheduled
in Schedule II of the 1971 Convention. The Committee recommended
that     AB-CHMINACA          (N-[(2S)-1-Amino-3-methyl-1-oxobutan-2-yl]-1-
(cyclohexylmethyl)-1H-indazole-3-carboxamide) be placed in Schedule II under
the UN Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971.

5.1.2    5F-ADB/5F-MDMB-PINACA
Substance identification
Chemically, 5F-ADB (also known as 5F-MDMB-PINACA) is methyl (2S)-2-
{[1-(5-fluoropentyl)-1H-indazole-3-carbonyl]amino}-3,3-dimethylbutanoate.
5F-ADB contains a chiral centre at the C-2 carbon of the oxobutan-2-yl side
chain, so that two enantiomers exist: (R)-5F-ADB and (S)-5F-ADB.

Previous review
5F-ADB has not been previously pre-reviewed or critically reviewed. A direct
critical review was proposed based on information brought to WHO’s attention
that 5F-ADB is clandestinely manufactured, of especially serious risk to public
health and society, and of no recognized therapeutic use by any Party. Preliminary
information collected from various sources indicated that this substance may
cause substantial harm and that it has no medical use.
                                                                                           17
Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
5F-ADB is a synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonist. It has an indazole core,
which is a common structural feature in a number of the SCRAs. 5F-ADB has
potent binding affinity for the CB1 receptor, and a greater potency than THC and
MDMB-CHMICA, both of which are listed as Schedule II substances in the UN
Convention on Psychotropic Substances 1971. 5F-ADB significantly increases
the spontaneous firing rate of dopaminergic neurons, an effect that is blocked
when the CB1 antagonist AM251 is present, indicating a CB1 receptor-mediated
increase in dopaminergic activity.
        5F-ADB appears to have similar effects to other SCRA substances in the
individual user. In 2016, 35 cases of acute intoxication of people with confirmed
exposure to 5F-ADB were reported to the EMCDDA. In five additional published
cases of nonfatal intoxication, in which 5F-ADB was analytically confirmed,
central nervous system effects including psychomotor agitation, confusion,
altered consciousness, vomiting, headache, dizziness, dilated pupils, acute
psychosis and anxiety were observed.

Dependence potential
No controlled, experimental studies directly pertinent to the dependence
potential of 5F-ADB in either laboratory animals or human subjects are available.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
Similar to other SCRAs, 5F-ADB is found as a constituent in herbal mixtures that
are sold under a variety of product names as legal alternatives to cannabis. The
most common way of using it is by smoking or vaping through an e-cigarette.
        5F-ADB has been widely available on the European market since 2014.
The compound has been seized in the form of powder, herbal material, liquids and
blotters. More than 1700 seizures have been reported in Europe alone. 5F-ADB
seizures have also been reported from Indonesia, Japan, Kazakhstan, the Russian
Federation and Ukraine.
        Thirty-five cases of acute intoxication and 28 deaths were reported to
the EMCDDA following confirmed exposure to 5F-ADB, either alone or in
combination with other substances. In at least 20 of the 28 deaths, 5F-ADB was
either the cause of death or contributed to death. Cases of impaired driving and
deaths involving 5F-ADB have also been reported from Japan.

Therapeutic usefulness
5F-ADB has no approved medical or veterinary use.

Recommendation
5F-ADB is a synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonist. It has cannabimimetic effects
that are more potent than those of THC and MDMB-CHMICA, which are listed
as Schedule II substances in accordance with the Convention on Psychotropic
Substances of 1971. Its mode of action suggests the potential for dependence and
likelihood of abuse. There is evidence of an increase in the number of people
using 5F-ADB in many countries and fatal and nonfatal intoxication has resulted.
This substance causes substantial harm and has no therapeutic usefulness. The
Committee recommended that 5F-ADB, also known as 5F-MDMB-PINACA
(Methyl        (2S)-2-{[1-(5-fluoropentyl)-1H-indazole-3-carbonyl]amino}-3,3-
dimethylbutanoate) be placed in Schedule II under the UN Convention on
Psychotropic Substances of 1971.

5.1.3     4-Fluoroamphetamine (4-FA)
Substance identification
The chemical name of 4-FA is 1-(4-Fluorophenyl)propan-2-amine. The presence
of a chiral centre at the α-carbon of the side chain gives rise to the enantiomeric
pair of (S)-4-FA and (R)-4-FA. 4-FA is most likely to be available as the racemic
mixture.

Previous review
4-FA underwent a critical review by the ECDD in 2015. At that time, the
Committee recommended that 4-FA not be placed under international control due
to insufficient evidence regarding dependence, abuse and risks to public health.
However, it was kept under surveillance. Preliminary information collected from
various sources indicated that this substance may cause substantial harm and that
it has no medical use, thereby warranting an updated critical review.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
4-FA is a ring-substituted derivative of amfetamine, which is listed in Schedule II
of the United Nations 1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances. 4-FA shares
some effects of psychostimulants and of the entactogens. Similar to amfetamine-
like stimulants, 4-FA releases dopamine, noradrenaline and serotonin, and
displays amfetamine-like features in a number of in vivo and in vitro assays,
including the induction of locomotor activity and associated dopamine release in
the striatum and nucleus accumbens (regions of the brain linked to the rewarding
effects of drugs). 4-FA differs from (+)-amfetamine in its ability to increase
extracellular serotonin concentrations in the rat nucleus accumbens.
         Some users report that 4-FA promotes pro-social effects that might
overlap with those of 3,4-methylenedioxy-methamphetamine (MDMA). Recent
studies, including a systematic survey of users, confirmed that the effects of 4-FA
were consistent with a psychomotor/entactogen stimulant profile. Some adverse
reactions in users have been reported that required hospitalization and others
have resulted in death. The clinical features associated with 4-FA intoxication
include agitation, tachycardia, hypertension, hyperthermia, cardiovascular
toxicity and cerebrovascular complications such as severe headaches and cerebral
haemorrhage.

Dependence potential
No reports from controlled, experimental studies pertinent to the possible
physical dependence effects of 4-FA in laboratory animals and humans are
available.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
In nonclinical studies in rodents, 4-FA shows classic features associated with
amfetamine-like stimulants that are predictive of abuse liability. These include
release of dopamine, induction of locomotor activity and substitution for the
discriminative stimulus effects of (+)-amfetamine. It is also self-administered by
rhesus monkeys.
        The presence of 4-FA in Europe has been observed at least since 2007.
Over the years, it has been found in products sold as “ecstasy”/MDMA tablets,
amfetamine powder and also as an adulterant present in other controlled
substances. 4-FA is also available online or from offline retailers as a single
substance under its own name. 4-FA can be taken orally or insufflated. It is rarely
injected.
        Most reports of 4-FA use so far are from European countries. Seizures
have been documented in a number of European countries and 4-FA is controlled
through national legislation in several countries.

Therapeutic usefulness
There are no known approved medical or veterinary applications of 4-FA.

Recommendation
4-FA is a ring-substituted derivative of amfetamine, which is listed in Schedule
II of the United Nations Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971. In
nonclinical studies, 4-FA has been found to share several effects produced by
psychostimulants that are predictive of abuse liability. These include activation
of locomotion, substitution for the amfetamine discriminative stimulus, and
self-administration. Users report effects of 4-FA that are consistent with a
psychomotor/entactogen stimulant profile. It has been found in products sold as
“ecstasy”/MDMA tablets, amfetamine powder, as an adulterant present in other
controlled substances, and is sold in its own right. Seizures of 4-FA have occurred
in more than 20 countries, and several countries have placed it under national
control. Some adverse reactions have been reported that required hospitalization
and others that have resulted in death.
        The Committee considered that the degree of risk to public health and
society associated with the abuse of 4-FA is substantial. Therapeutic usefulness
has not been recorded. The Committee recognized that 4-FA has similar
abuse potential and similar ill effects to substances in Schedule II of the UN
Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971. The Committee considered
that there is sufficient evidence that 4-FA is being or is likely to be abused so as
to constitute a public health and social problem warranting the placing of the
substance under international control. The Committee recommended that 4-FA
(1-(4-Fluorophenyl)propan-2-amine) be placed in Schedule II under the UN
Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971.

5.1.4     AB-PINACA
Substance identification
Chemically, AB-PINACA is N-[(2S)-1-Amino-3-methyl-1-oxobutan-2-yl]-1-
pentyl-1H-indazole-3-carboxamide. AB-PINACA has stereoisomers.

Previous review
AB-PINACA has not been previously pre-reviewed or critically reviewed. A
direct critical review was proposed based on information brought to WHO’s
attention that AB-PINACA is clandestinely manufactured, of especially serious
risk to public health and society, and of no recognized therapeutic use by any
Party. Preliminary information collected from various sources indicated that this
substance may cause substantial harm and that it has no medical use.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
AB-PINACA shows high affinity to cannabinoid CB1 receptors and differs from
a number of other SCRAs in demonstrating greater selectivity towards the CB2
receptors. AB-PINACA induces responses in animals that are also observed with
THC and internationally controlled SCRAs. For instance, it produces all the
effects characteristic of cannabinoids in the cannabinoid tetrad assay including
the suppression of locomotor activity, reduction of body temperature and
production of antinociception and catalepsy with a 2- to 14-fold greater potency
than THC. These effects are reversible by the cannabinoid receptor antagonist
rimonabant.

Dependence potential
No reports of controlled, experimental studies using human or laboratory animal
subjects directly pertinent to the dependence potential of AB-PINACA are
available.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
AB-PINACA is sold in the form of herbal mixtures for smoking. AB-PINACA
products have been implicated in cases of impaired driving and motor vehicle
collisions.
        Reports received from the European Early Warning System on NPS
indicate that AB-PINACA has been found in herbal mixtures and powders in
several countries. AB-PINACA detections have also been reported in the USA
since 2013. Data from law enforcement agencies suggest that AB-PINACA was
one of the most commonly reported substances used in the USA in 2014. Japan
was the first country to identify AB-PINACA and an increasing number of
countries have since reported its use.

Therapeutic usefulness
AB-PINACA is not known to have any approved therapeutic applications.

Recommendation
AB-PINACA is a synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonist and is clandestinely
manufactured. It induces similar effects to other SCRAs and THC, which are listed
as Schedule II substances in accordance with the Convention on Psychotropic
Substances of 1971. Adverse effects associated with AB-PINACA use include
loss of consciousness, convulsions and death. Ingestion of AB-PINACA products
has been implicated in cases of impaired driving and motor vehicle collisions.
Reports of AB-PINACA’s use have occurred in more than 20 countries.
         The Committee considered that the degree of risk to public health and
society associated with the abuse of AB-PINACA is substantial. Therapeutic
usefulness has not been recorded. It recognized that AB-PINACA has similar
abuse liability and similar ill effects to other SCRAs in Schedule II of the UN
Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971. The Committee considered that
there is sufficient evidence that AB-PINACA is being or is likely to be abused
so as to constitute a public health and social problem warranting the placing of
the substance under international control. The Committee recommended that
AB-PINACA            (N-[(2S)-1-Amino-3-methyl-1-oxobutan-2-yl]-1-pentyl-1H-
indazole-3-carboxamide) be placed in Schedule II under the UN Convention on
Psychotropic Substances of 1971.

5.1.5     Ocfentanil
Substance identification
Chemically, ocfentanil is N-(2-Fluorophenyl)-2-methoxy-N-[1-(2-phenylethyl)
piperidin-4-yl]acetamide. It has no stereoisomers.

Previous review
Ocfentanil has not been previously pre-reviewed or critically reviewed. A direct
critical review was proposed based on information brought to the attention of
WHO that ocfentanil is clandestinely manufactured, poses a risk to public health
and society, and has no recognized therapeutic use by any Party. Preliminary
information collected from various sources indicated that this substance may
cause substantial harm and that it has no medical use.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Chemically, ocfentanil comprises two modifications to fentanyl: replacement of
the propionamide group with a methoxyacetamide and the addition of ortho-
fluorine to the N-phenyl ring. The pharmacodynamic effects of ocfentanil appear
to be similar to those of fentanyl, a potent agonist at the μ subtype of opioid
receptors and a Schedule I drug under the 1961 Convention. In rodents, ocfentanil
was 2.3 times more potent as an analgesic than fentanyl, and its duration of action
was shorter. In human subjects, ocfentanil produces a dose-related increase in
analgesia and a decrease in respiration. Clinical research conducted on its use as
a supplement to general anaesthesia describes a similar potency of ocfentanil and
fentanyl and it had no clear advantage over the latter in terms of safety. Ocfentanil
has also been reported to produce other typical opioid effects such as itching,
nausea and sedation. Ocfentanil-related deaths have been reported in some
European and North American countries.

Dependence potential
No data regarding the dependence and abuse potential of ocfentanil from
controlled, human or laboratory animal studies are available.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
Ocfentanil is sold online as heroin. Users of material containing analytically
confirmed ocfentanil have reported effects similar to those of heroin including
euphoria with stimulation. Epidemiological estimates of use are not available.
Ocfentanil is a regulated substance in a number of countries.

Therapeutic usefulness
Ocfentanil is not used therapeutically. It was investigated for therapeutic purposes
but found to have a similar clinical profile to fentanyl so further development was
discontinued.

Recommendation
Ocfentanil is an opioid that is structurally related to fentanyl, which is regulated
under Schedule I of the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs. It produces
opioid effects including analgesia, euphoria, sedation and potentially serious
respiratory depression. Ocfentanil-related deaths have been reported, and it has
been brought under national control in several countries in various regions of
the world.
         Ocfentanil is a compound liable to similar abuse and with similar ill
effects to controlled opioids such as fentanyl, which are included in Schedule I of
the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961. It has no recorded therapeutic
use, and its use has been associated with fatalities. There is sufficient evidence that
it is being or is likely to be abused so as to constitute a public health and social
problem warranting the placing of the substance under international control.
Thus, because it meets the required condition of similarity, it is recommended
that ocfentanil (N-(2-Fluorophenyl)-2-methoxy-N-[1-(2-phenylethyl)piperidin-
4-yl]acetamide) be placed in Schedule I of the Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs, 1961, as consistent with Article 3, paragraph 3 (iii) of that Convention in
that the substance is liable to similar abuse and productive of similar ill effects to
drugs in Schedule I.

5.1.6     Furanyl fentanyl
Substance identification
Furanyl fentanyl is chemically known as N-Phenyl-N-[1-(2-phenylethyl)
piperidin-4-yl]furan-2-carboxamide. Furanyl fentanyl has no stereoisomers.

Previous review
Furanyl fentanyl has not been previously pre-reviewed or critically reviewed.
A direct critical review was proposed based on information brought to WHO’s
attention that furanyl fentanyl is clandestinely manufactured, of especially serious
risk to public health and society, and of no recognized therapeutic use by any
Party. Preliminary information collected from various sources indicated that this
substance may cause substantial harm and that it has no medical use.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Furanyl fentanyl is a synthetic opioid that is an analogue of fentanyl. The methods
developed for the synthesis of fentanyl are applicable to the synthesis of furanyl
fentanyl as it relies on similar precursors and synthetic methods. It is a μ-opioid
receptor agonist and produces typical opioid effects including analgesia, miosis,
sedation and respiratory depression.

Dependence potential
No information on controlled experimental studies in laboratory animals
or humans directly pertinent to the dependence or abuse potential of furanyl
fentanyl are currently available.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
The EMCDDA-Europol report noted 113 seizures across a number of European
countries. The United States Centers for Disease Control reported 244 drug
submissions testing positive for furanyl fentanyl in the first seven months of
2016. Authorities in the USA reported a total of 607 drug samples in which
furanyl fentanyl was identified in forensic laboratories between December 2015
and September 2016. Deaths and cases of intoxication associated with furanyl
fentanyl usage have been reported from Europe and North America between 2015
and 2017. The US Drug Enforcement Agency reported 128 confirmed fatalities
associated with the drug. Canada reported 43 overdose events caused by crack
cocaine contaminated with furanyl fentanyl. Serious adverse events (10 cases of
acute intoxication and 19 deaths) have been associated with furanyl fentanyl use
in Europe.

Therapeutic usefulness
There are no approved therapeutic applications nor any marketing authorizations
for furanyl fentanyl.

Recommendation
Furanyl fentanyl is a compound liable to similar abuse and with similar ill effects
to controlled opioids such as fentanyl, which are included in Schedule I of the
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961. It has no recorded therapeutic use
and its use has been associated with fatalities. There is sufficient evidence that
it is being or is likely to be abused so as to constitute a public health and social
problem warranting the placing of the substance under international control.
Thus, because it meets the required condition of similarity, it is recommended
that furanyl fentanyl (N-Phenyl-N-[1-(2-phenylethyl)piperidin-4-yl]furan-
2-carboxamide) be placed in Schedule I of the Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs, 1961, as consistent with Article 3, paragraph 3 (iii) of that Convention in
that the substance is liable to similar abuse and productive of similar ill effects to
drugs in Schedule I.

5.1.7     Acryloylfentanyl (Acrylfentanyl)
Substance identification
Chemically, acryloylfentanyl is N-Phenyl-N-[1-(2-phenylethyl)piperidin-4-yl]
prop-2-enamide. It has no stereoisomers.

Previous review
Acryloylfentanyl has not been previously pre-reviewed or critically reviewed.
A direct critical review was proposed based on information brought to WHO’s
attention that acryloylfentanyl is clandestinely manufactured, of especially
serious risk to public health and society, and of no recognized therapeutic use by
any Party. Preliminary information collected from various sources indicated that
this substance may cause substantial harm and that it has no medical use.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Acryloylfentanyl is a μ-opioid receptor agonist with a potency similar to fentanyl.
In mice, it produces antinociception and has a longer duration of action than
fentanyl. In humans, miosis, decreased consciousness and respiratory depression
have been associated with acryloylfentanyl use. These effects were reversed by
naloxone.

Dependence potential
No controlled, experimental studies that have investigated the dependence
potential of acryloylfentanyl in laboratory animals or humans are available.
However, the limited information obtainable from user websites suggests that
some users of acryloylfentanyl report an urge to re-dose as well as having
symptoms suggestive of withdrawal.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
No controlled, experimental studies that have investigated the abuse potential of
acryloylfentanyl in laboratory animals or humans are available. Acryloylfentanyl
use has been reported in several European countries and in North America. Data
in Europe suggest that the substance is sold online, typically as a powder and
as ready-to-use nasal sprays. Acryloylfentanyl is often described as a “research
chemical” on such websites. There have been 130 reported deaths associated with
acryloylfentanyl use in Europe and North America. Acryloylfentanyl is controlled
in a number of countries in different regions of the world.

Therapeutic usefulness
There is no evidence that acryloylfentanyl has been used therapeutically.

Recommendation
The available evidence shows that acryloylfentanyl is an opioid receptor agonist
and its pharmacodynamics and clinical effects are similar to those of controlled
fentanyls. It binds to opioid receptors and produces antinociception, decreased
consciousness, miosis and respiratory depression that can be fatal. The substance
has been detected in samples from people who have died and in cases of nonfatal
intoxication and its use is a significant concern in a number of countries.
         Acryloylfentanyl is a compound liable to similar abuse and with similar ill
effects to controlled opioids such as fentanyl, which are included in Schedule I of
the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961. It has no recorded therapeutic
use, and its use has been associated with fatalities. There is sufficient evidence that
it is being or is likely to be abused so as to constitute a public health and social
problem warranting the placing of the substance under international control.
Thus, because it meets the required condition of similarity, it is recommended
that acryloylfentanyl (N N-Phenyl-N-[1-(2-phenylethyl)piperidin-4-yl]prop-2-
enamide) be placed in Schedule I of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs,
1961, as consistent with Article 3, paragraph 3 (iii) of that Convention in that the
substance is liable to similar abuse and productive of similar ill effects to drugs
in Schedule I.

5.1.8     Carfentanil
Substance identification
Chemically, carfentanil is Methyl 1-(2-phenylethyl)-4-[phenyl(propanoyl)
amino]piperidine-4-carboxylate. Carfentanil has no stereoisomers.

Previous review
Carfentanil has not been previously pre-reviewed or critically reviewed. A
critical review was initiated due to a notification from a Party to the Conventions
concerning the scheduling of a substance.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Carfentanil contains a carboxymethyl group in the fourth position of the
piperidine ring of fentanyl, a drug regulated under Schedule I of the 1961
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs. Carfentanil can be easily converted into
sufentanil and alfentanil, which are Schedule I drugs under the 1961 Convention
on Narcotic Drugs. Carfentanil binds with high affinity to μ-opioid receptors,
and less so to δ- and κ-opioid receptors. Similar to other μ-opioid agonists, it
depresses the respiratory centre, produces analgesia, and causes drowsiness,
nausea, miosis and sedation. As an analgesic, carfentanil is approximately 10 000
times more potent than morphine. The pharmacodynamic effects of carfentanil
can be reversed by opioid antagonists, such as naloxone and naltrexone although
re-narcotization can occur.

Dependence potential
Carfentanil has been demonstrated to prevent and alleviate signs of withdrawal
in the morphine-dependent rhesus monkey indicating its cross-dependency
with morphine. No controlled dependence studies in human subjects have been
reported.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
No controlled experimental studies have been conducted investigating the
abuse potential of carfentanil. In vitro and in vivo studies present carfentanil
as a typical μ-opioid agonist, similar in its pharmacology to the controlled
substance, fentanyl. Its pharmacokinetic properties account for its easy and rapid
absorption, rapid onset of action and extreme potency. The latter is related to
its serious hazardousness to human health, because carfentanil has a qualitative
potency 10 000 times that of morphine and 100 times that of fentanyl.
         Carfentanil has been detected in powder form in 618 seizures in
Europe, amounting to nearly 2.7 kg of seized material (equivalent to 27 000 kg
of morphine). It has also been identified in seizures in North America, where
it has been sold as counterfeit oxycodone or alprazolam tablets. Carfentanil is
used as an adulterant of other controlled substances such as heroin, cocaine and
metamfetamine. Carfentanil has been associated with hundreds of deaths in
North America and in Europe. Estimates of its lethality are challenging because
carfentanil is not always routinely tested for following overdose and because the
concentrations are typically extremely low in biological samples. Carfentanil has
been placed under some form of national regulation by numerous countries in
different regions.

Therapeutic usefulness
Carfentanil has been used in veterinary medicine since 1986, primarily for
immobilizing large animals, because of its extreme potency. Etorphine, another
opioid compound used in veterinary medicine for immobilizing large animals,
is in Schedule I and IV of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961, but is
less dangerously potent than carfentanil. Labelled carfentanil ([11C]-carfentanil)
is used as a positron emission tomography (PET) radiotracer. It has no approved
therapeutic use in humans.

Recommendation
Carfentanil is convertible into sufentanil and alfentanil, two very potent opioid
analgesics controlled as Schedule I drugs under the 1961 Convention on Narcotic
Drugs. It is a μ-opioid receptor agonist, and its pharmacodynamic and clinical
effects are similar to those of fentanyl but it is about 100 times more potent.
It binds to opioid receptors, and produces respiratory depression, decreased
consciousness, antinociception and miosis. The substance has been associated
with hundreds of deaths and nonfatal intoxications globally, and is a significant
concern in a number of countries. Due to the extremely small doses that induce
lethal effects, it poses a particularly serious threat to public health.
         Carfentanil is a compound liable to similar abuse and with similar ill
effects to controlled opioids such as fentanyl that are included in Schedule I of the
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961. There is sufficient evidence that
it is being or is likely to be abused so as to constitute a public health and social
problem warranting the placing of the substance under international control.
Thus, because it meets the required condition of similarity, it is recommended that
carfentanil (Methyl 1-(2-phenylethyl)-4-[phenyl(propanoyl)amino]piperidine-
4-carboxylate) be placed in Schedule I of the Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs, 1961, as consistent with Article 3, paragraph 3 (iii) of that Convention in
that the substance is liable to similar abuse and productive of similar ill effects to
drugs in Schedule I.
         The Committee recognized the impact that international scheduling could
have on veterinary access to carfentanil in relation to its therapeutic use in large
animals. However, the Committee was particularly concerned about the extreme
potency of the substance and the serious risk to public health. The Committee felt
that the therapeutic advantages did not offset the severe threat to human health.
As such, and taking into consideration that substances in Schedule IV afford
Parties the opportunity to adopt special measures for drugs with particularly
dangerous properties, the Committee recommended that carfentanil (Methyl
1-(2-phenylethyl)-4-[phenyl(propanoyl)amino]piperidine-4-carboxylate)              be
placed in Schedule IV of the UN Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961.

5.1.9     4-Fluoroisobutyrfentanyl (4-FIBF, pFIBF)
Substance identification
Chemically,    4-fluoroisobutyrfentanyl      (4-FIBF,     pFIBF)    is    N-(4-
Fluorophenyl)-2-methyl-N-[1-(2-phenylethyl)piperidin-4-yl]propanamide:
4-Fluoroisobutyryfentanyl is the positional isomer of 4-fluoro-butyrfentanyl (4-
FIBF).

Previous review
4-Fluoroisobutyrfentanyl has not been previously pre-reviewed or critically
reviewed. A direct critical review was proposed based on information brought
to WHO’s attention that it is clandestinely manufactured, of especially serious
risk to public health and society, and of no recognized therapeutic use by any
Party. Preliminary information collected from various sources indicated that this
substance may cause substantial harm and that it has no medical use.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
4-Fluoroisobutyryfentanyl is similar to fentanyl, a drug in Schedule I of the 1961
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs. It is manufactured using precursors and
synthetic methods similar to those used to manufacture the pharmaceutical,
fentanyl.
        4-Fluoroisobutyryfentanyl potently and preferentially binds to the
µ-opioid receptor relative to the κ- and δ-opioid receptors. It also preferentially
activates the µ-opioid receptor relative to the other opioid receptors. This in
vitro profile is similar to that of fentanyl. Similar to fentanyl and morphine,
4-fluoroisobutyryfentanyl produces antinociception in laboratory animals that
is blocked with naloxone. Consistent with clinical effects involving fentanyl
analogues and derivatives, typical opioid overdose symptoms of central nervous
system and respiratory depression, decreased consciousness and miotic pupils
have been observed with 4-fluoroisobutyryfentanyl, but its use has also been
associated with tachycardia and hypertension. Two countries have reported
deaths associated with 4-fluoroisobutyryfentanyl use.

Dependence potential
No controlled, experimental studies of either laboratory animals or
human subjects that are directly pertinent to the dependence potential of
4-fluoroisobutyryfentanyl are currently available.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
Evidence of abuse of 4-Fluoroisobutyrfentanyl is available. It is currently sold
online and through illicit markets as a nonscheduled substitute for illicit opioids
and/or prescription opioids. It has been discussed on user forums where it is
described as having typical opioid effects.
        4-Fluoroisobutyryfentanyl has been encountered as a single substance,
seized as a liquid, in powder form, and as tablets or in mixtures with heroin,
fentanyl, furanyl fentanyl, metamfetamine and cocaine. Based on forensic reports
and paraphernalia found at overdose sites, routes of administration appear to
be intravenous, oral and as a nasal spray. 4-Fluoroisobutyryfentanyl has been
connected to fatal overdoses in which intravenous and insufflation routes of
administration were confirmed. One country reported that 62 overdose deaths
involving 4-fluoroisobutyryfentanyl abuse had occurred in 2016 alone. Seizures
of the compound have been reported from Europe and North America.

Therapeutic usefulness
No countries have approved 4-fluoroisobutryfentanyl for either medical or
veterinary use.

Recommendation
4-Fluoroisobutyryfentanyl is an opioid that has similar in vitro and in vivo effects
to those of fentanyl and other fentanyl analogues that are included in Schedule I
of the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs. It potently and preferentially
binds to, and activates the µ-opioid receptor more than the κ- and δ-opioid
receptors. Similar to fentanyl and morphine, 4-fluoroisobutyryfentanyl produces
antinociception in laboratory animals, which is antagonized by naloxone. It is
currently sold online and through illicit markets as a non-controlled substitute
for illicit opioids and/or prescription opioids. Consistent with clinical effects
involving fentanyl analogues and derivatives, typical opioid overdose symptoms
of central nervous system and respiratory depression, decreased consciousness
and miotic pupils have been observed with 4-fluoroisobutyryfentanyl.
         4-Fluoroisobutyryfentanyl is a compound liable to similar abuse and
with similar ill effects to controlled opioids such as fentanyl, which are included
in Schedule I of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961. It has no
recorded therapeutic use, and its use has been associated with fatalities. There
is sufficient evidence that it is being or is likely to be abused so as to constitute a
public health and social problem warranting the placing of the substance under
international control. Thus, because it meets the required condition of similarity,
it is recommended that 4-fluoroisobutyryfentanyl (N-(4-Fluorophenyl)-2-
methyl-N-[1-(2-phenylethyl)piperidin-4-yl]propanamide) be placed in Schedule
I of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961, as consistent with Article 3,
paragraph 3 (iii) of that Convention in that the substance is liable to similar abuse
and productive of similar ill effects to drugs in Schedule I.

5.1.10 Tetrahydrofuranyl fentanyl (THF-F)
Substance identification
Chemically, tetrahydrofuranyl fentanyl is N-Phenylphenyl-N-[1-(2-phenylethyl)
piperidin-4-yl]oxolane-2-carboxamide. Tetrahydrofuranyl fentanyl contains
a stereogenic centre allowing for the existence of a pair of enantiomers, (S)-
tetrahydrofuranyl fentanyl and (R)- tetrahydrofuranyl fentanyl. There is no
information on the actual enantiomers found on the illicit drug market at the
time of the report.

Previous review
Tetrahydrofuranyl fentanyl has not been previously pre-reviewed or critically
reviewed. A direct critical review was proposed based on information brought to
WHO’s attention that tetrahydrofuranyl fentanyl is clandestinely manufactured,
of especially serious risk to public health and society, and of no recognized
therapeutic use by any Party. Preliminary information collected from various
sources indicated that this substance may cause substantial harm and that it has
no medical use.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Similar to controlled opioids such as fentanyl, tetrahydrofuranyl fentanyl
selectively binds to and activates the μ-opioid receptor and does so with greater
potency and efficacy than with the δ- and κ-opioid receptors. A male with
analytically confirmed tetrahydrofuranyl fentanyl intoxication suffered reduced
consciousness, respiratory depression and miotic pupils, all effects associated
with fentanyl.

Dependence potential
Currently, there are no controlled laboratory animal or human studies
available that are directly pertinent to the dependence or abuse potential of
tetrahydrofuranyl fentanyl.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
Tetrahydrofuranyl fentanyl is currently sold online and through illicit markets
as a nonscheduled substitute for illicit opioids and/or prescription opioids.
Tetrahydrofuranyl fentanyl has been seized in the form of a liquid, in powder
form and as disk-shaped tablets. Based on forensic reports and paraphernalia
found at overdose sites, routes of administration appear to be intravenous, oral
and as a nasal spray. Seizures of tetrahydrofuranyl fentanyl have been reported
from Europe and North America. One country reported a total of 14 deaths of
people with confirmed exposure to tetrahydrofuranyl fentanyl between 2016
and 2017. In at least 12 cases, tetrahydrofuranyl fentanyl was the cause of death
or contributed to the death. Another country reported two confirmed deaths
associated with tetrahydrofuranyl fentanyl. A number of countries in different
regions have controlled tetrahydrofuranyl fentanyl under national legislation.

Therapeutic usefulness
There are currently no approved therapeutic applications or recorded medical
uses for tetrahydrofuranyl fentanyl.

Recommendation
Controlled in vitro studies indicate that tetrahydrofuranyl fentanyl has affinity and
efficacy as an agonist at the μ-opioid receptor, findings which are consistent with
the pharmacological effects observed with use of controlled opioid drugs such
as morphine and fentanyl. An analytically confirmed case of tetrahydrofuranyl
fentanyl intoxication indicated effects that were also consistent with other opioid
drugs. Several deaths have been associated with tetrahydrofuranyl fentanyl use.
Seizures of the drug have occurred in at least three countries, and it is sold on the
Internet.
         Tetrahydrofuranyl fentanyl is a compound liable to similar abuse and
with similar ill effects to controlled opioids such as fentanyl that are included
in Schedule I of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961. It has no
recorded therapeutic use, and its use has been associated with fatalities. There
is sufficient evidence that it is being or is likely to be abused so as to constitute
a public health and social problem warranting the placing of the substance
under international control. Thus, because it meets the required condition of
similarity, it is recommended that tetrahydrofuranyl fentanyl (N-Phenyl-N-[1-
(2-phenylethyl)piperidin-4-yl]oxolane-2-carboxamide) be placed in Schedule I
of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961, as consistent with Article 3,
paragraph 3 (iii) of that Convention in that the substance is liable to similar abuse
and productive of similar ill effects to drugs in Schedule I.

5.1.11 UR-144
Substance identification
Chemically, UR-144 is (1-Pentyl-1H-indol-3-yl)(2,2,3,3-tetramethylcyclopropyl)
methanone. It has no stereoisomers.

Previous review
UR-144 was previously critically reviewed at the thirty-sixth ECDD meeting
in 2014. The Committee had recommended that UR-144 not be placed under
international control at that time but be kept under surveillance. Of particular
significance to the Committee was the lack of analytically confirmed cases of
nonfatal and fatal intoxications involving solely UR-144. Subsequent data
collected from the literature and from different countries indicating that this
substance may cause substantial harm and that it has no medical use warranted
an updated critical review.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
UR-144 is a metabolite of XLR-11, a drug in Schedule II under the UN Convention
on Psychotropic Substances of 1971. UR-144 binds to both cannabinoid CB1 and
CB2 receptors, and has a 1.4 times higher binding affinity to the CB1 receptor than
that of THC. It acts as a full agonist at these receptors in in vitro assays. UR-144
produces a complete cannabinoid profile in the mouse tetrad assay. The pyrolysed
form of UR-144 (UR-144 degradant) shows a four-fold higher agonist activity at
the CB1 receptor and augments the hypothermic and akinetic actions in mice
compared to the parent, indicating that smoking the drug may augment the
pharmacological effects on the central nervous system. In other animal studies,
UR-144 substitutes for the discriminative stimulus effects of THC in rats, and also
in mice, effects which are blocked by the CB1 receptor antagonist, rimonabant.

Dependence potential
Currently, there are no controlled human or other animal studies available that
document the dependence potential of UR-144.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
UR-144 produces several effects similar to other SCRAs, which are predictive of
the likelihood of a similar abuse potential. Nonmedical use has been reported in
numerous countries. Seizures of products containing UR-144 have been reported
from East Asia, Europe and North America. UR-144 was one of the most
frequently seized synthetic cannabinoids in Europe in 2015. More than 5000
reports identified UR-144 use in one country. Several reports have analytically
identified UR-144 in cases of impaired driving, including some involving
accidents. The most common clinical effects observed were slurred speech and
dilated pupils; others included poor coordination, unsteady gait and difficulty
standing, as well as abnormal pupillary reaction. Acute kidney injury requiring
haemodialysis following UR-144 use has been described. Numerous countries
have brought UR-144 under national legislation.

Therapeutic usefulness
UR-144 has no current therapeutic use, and there are no ongoing applications for
medical use.

Recommendation
UR-144 produces cannabimimetic effects similar to other SCRAs and THC, drugs
controlled under Schedule II of the UN Convention on Psychotropic Substances
of 1971. UR-144 binds to, and functions as a full agonist at both cannabinoid
CB1 and CB2 receptors. UR-144 substitutes for the discriminative stimulus effects
of THC in laboratory animals. Nonmedical use of UR-144 has been reported in
more than a dozen countries and has been analytically confirmed in samples from
people involved in impaired driving instances. In 2015, UR-144 was one of the
most frequently seized synthetic cannabinoids. UR-144 appears to constitute a
substantial threat to public health and poses a social problem. There is insufficient
evidence to draw a conclusion regarding its capacity to produce dependence-like
effects. However, there is sufficient evidence to conclude that it has the capacity
to produce similar effects to controlled SCRAs.
         The Committee considered that the degree of risk to public health and
society associated with the abuse of UR-144 is substantial. Therapeutic usefulness
has not been recorded. It recognized that UR-144 has similar abuse potential
and similar ill effects to other SCRAs in Schedule II of the UN Convention
on Psychotropic Substances of 1971. The Committee considered that there is
sufficient evidence that UR-144 is being or is likely to be abused so as to constitute
a public health and social problem warranting the placing of the substance under
international control. The Committee recommended that UR-144 ((1-Pentyl-1H-
indol-3-yl)(2,2,3,3-tetramethylcyclopropyl)methanone) be placed in Schedule II
under the UN Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971.

5.1.12 5F-PB-22
Substance identification
Chemically, 5F-PB-22 is Quinolin-8-yl              1-(5-fluoropentyl)-1H-indole-3-
carboxylate. It has no stereoisomers.

Previous review
5F-PB-22 has not been previously pre-reviewed or critically reviewed. A direct
critical review was proposed based on information brought to WHO’s attention
that 5F-PB-22 is clandestinely manufactured, of especially serious risk to public
health and society, and of no recognized therapeutic use by any Party. Preliminary
information collected from various sources indicated that this substance may
cause substantial harm and that it has no medical use.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
In vitro and in vivo studies indicate that 5F-PB-22 binds to and activates the CB1
receptor, and induces a number of biological responses that are also triggered by
THC and other SCRAs. 5F-PB-22 binds to the CB1 receptor and activates it as
a full agonist, and does so with greater potency than XLR-11 and THC. It also
suppresses locomotor activity and reduces body temperature (typical cannabinoid
effects). 5F-PB-22 completely substitutes for the discriminative stimulus effects
of THC in rats with a 22-fold greater potency than THC itself.

Dependence potential
No information from controlled, experimental studies evaluating the dependence
potential of 5F-PB-22 in laboratory animals is available. There is, however, some
indication of dependency in users. Six users of herbal mixtures containing
5F-AKB-48 and 5F-PB-22 reported abstinence-related symptoms including
agitation and suicidal and self-harm ideation. The urge to re-dose has also been
reported by users.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
Nonclinical studies indicate that 5F-PB-22 has effects predictive of abuse
potential associated with SCRAs. It activates CB1 receptors, depresses locomotor
activity and decreases core temperature. 5F-PB-22 completely substitutes for the
discriminative stimulus effects of THC in rats with a 22-fold greater potency,
suggesting it may induce at least some of the subjective effects of THC, and
consequently possesses SCRA-like abuse potential.
         5F-PB-22 is sold in the form of herbal mixtures designed for smoking.
Intoxication with 5F-PB-22 is commonly associated with seizures, cardiac
toxicity, agitation and unconsciousness. Several fatal and nonfatal cases of
intoxication associated with 5F-PB-22 use have been reported from Europe and
North America since 2013. In some cases, 5F-PB-22 was the only drug found in
the biological specimens. Several cases of driving under the influence of 5F-PB-
22 have resulted in accidents and injuries since 2012. Seizures of 5F-PB-22 have
been reported from many European countries since 2013. Cases of 5F-PB-22 use
have also been reported to UNODC’s Early Warning Advisory from about 30
countries since 2013. 5F-PB-22 is a controlled substance in several countries.

Therapeutic usefulness
There are no currently approved therapeutic human or veterinary uses of 5F-PB-22.

Recommendation
5F-PB-22 binds to and activates CB1 receptors, and it induces a number of
biological responses that are also triggered by SCRAs and THC. It produces
some cannabimimetic effects in laboratory animals, including the suppression of
locomotor activity and reduction of core temperature. It also substitutes for the
THC discriminative stimulus. Its dependence or abuse potential has yet not been
elucidated in controlled, laboratory studies, although there is some indication of
dependency in users. Intoxication with 5F-PB-22 is commonly associated with
convulsions, cardiac toxicity, agitation and unconsciousness. Several fatal and
nonfatal cases of intoxication associated with 5F-PB-22 use have been reported.
Seizures of 5F-PB-22 have been reported in many countries, and it is a controlled
substance in a number of countries.
         The Committee considered that the degree of risk to public health
and society associated with the abuse of 5F-PB-22 is substantial. Therapeutic
usefulness has not been recorded. It recognized that 5F-PB-22 has similar abuse
liability and has similar ill effects to other SCRAs in Schedule II of the UN
Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971. The Committee considered that
there is sufficient evidence that 5F-PB-22 is being or is likely to be abused so as
to constitute a public health and social problem warranting the placing of the
substance under international control. The Committee recommended that 5F-
PB-22 (Quinolin-8-yl 1-(5-fluoropentyl)-1H-indole-3-carboxylate) be placed in
Schedule II under the UN Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971.

5.1.13 Etizolam (INN)
Substance identification
Chemically, etizolam is 4-(2-Chlorophenyl)-2-ethyl-9-methyl-6H-thieno[3,2-ƒ]
[1,2,4]triazolo[4,3-α][1,4]diazepine. It does not have stereoisomers.

Previous review
The ECDD reviewed etizolam at its twenty-sixth meeting (1989) and its twenty-
seventh meeting (1990). At its thirty-seventh meeting in 2015, the Committee
pre-reviewed etizolam and recommended that a critical review was warranted
for a future meeting. The Committee noted deficiencies in the information and
suggested several potential sources that could be helpful in the preparation of the
critical review, including traffic accident reports, seizure data, user forums and
pharmacovigilance data.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Etizolam is a thienodiazepine derivative, with high affinity for the benzodiazepine
site in GABAA receptors. It also has pharmacological effects similar to those of
the model benzodiazepine, diazepam, which is in Schedule IV of the Convention
on Psychotropic Substances of 1971. It behaves as a full benzodiazepine
receptor agonist and allosterically potentiates the gamma-amino butyric acid
(GABA)-induced chloride current. In animals, it induces muscle relaxation,
has anticonvulsive effects, potentiates sleep time, causes a loss of the righting
reflex, and substitutes for the pentobarbital discriminative stimulus, similar to
diazepam.

Dependence potential
Limited data collected from studies in humans are available regarding the
dependence potential of etizolam. In case reports, one woman was able to be
tapered off etizolam without experiencing withdrawal symptoms; in another case,
a man was unable to stop using etizolam and during abstinence he experienced
symptoms characteristic of benzodiazepine withdrawal (palpitations, impaired
sleep, agitation and tremors).

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
In nonclinical studies, etizolam completely substitutes for the pentobarbital
discriminative stimulus in rhesus monkeys suggesting that etizolam would have
subjective effects similar to those of the sedative hypnotics and probably a similar
abuse potential. Reports have indicated that etizolam abuse has become a serious
problem in a few countries. Etizolam has reportedly become the predominant
benzodiazepine abused in one country and has been implicated in several deaths.
Although toxicology reports showed evidence of etizolam in these drug-related
deaths, there was also laboratory evidence of multiple drug use in all of the cases.
Etizolam is under national controls in several countries.

Therapeutic usefulness
Etizolam has marketing authorizations as a medicinal product in several
countries. It is not listed in the 20th WHO Model List of Essential Medicines
or the 6th WHO Model List of Essential Medicines for Children. Etizolam has
been used clinically to attenuate the recurrence of chronic subdural hematoma
after neurosurgery. It is also used to treat some psychiatric conditions, including
anxiety disorders.

Recommendation
Etizolam has some effects similar to those of diazepam (and other classical
benzodiazepines), which is included in Schedule IV of the 1971 UN Convention
on Psychotropic Substances. It induces muscle relaxation, has anticonvulsive
effects, potentiates sleep time, causes ataxia and substitutes for the pentobarbital
discriminative stimulus, similar to diazepam. Data on the misuse and abuse
of etizolam are still minimal, and it is difficult to describe its liability to abuse
as constituting “a significant risk to public health”. The risks of etizolam abuse
appear to be relatively low. Furthermore, there continue to be minimal preclinical
and clinical data obtained using established methods for assessing the abuse and
dependence liability of etizolam.
         Owing to the lack of significantly more information since the pre-review
conducted by the ECDD at its thirty-seventh meeting in 2015, and considering
the current insufficiency of data regarding dependence, abuse and risks to
public health (including risks to the individual), the Committee recommended
that etizolam (4-(2-Chlorophenyl)-2-ethyl-9-methyl-6H-thieno[3,2-ƒ][1,2,4]
triazolo[4,3-α][1,4]diazepine) be kept under surveillance. The Committee asked
the Secretariat to request more data from Member States that may be affected by
the misuse of etizolam, and which could facilitate a future review.

5.1.14 Pregabalin
Substance identification
Chemically, pregabalin is (3S)-3-(Aminomethyl)-5-methylhexanoic acid.
Pregabalin is the (S)-(+)-isomer of 3-isobutyl-GABA.

Previous review
Pregabalin has not been previously pre-reviewed or critically reviewed. A pre-
review of was proposed based on information received by the WHO Secretariat
regarding the misuse of pregabalin.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Pregabalin, a gabapentinoid, is an analogue of GABA. Pregabalin does not bind
to benzodiazepine or opioid receptors. Despite similarities to GABA, it does not
act at GABA receptors or synapses. Various drugs that are GABAergic are under
international control and pregabalin has been found to produce a number of
effects that are similar to those of some controlled substances.

Dependence potential
Evidence suggests that pregabalin can induce physical dependence. Discontinuation-
emergent symptoms from short- and long-term psychiatric studies were more
frequent in pregabalin-treated patients than in placebo-treated patients. Withdrawal
signs included insomnia, headache, nausea, infections, diarrhoea and chills.
Analysis of two pharmacokinetic studies also showed discontinuation-emergent
symptoms from pregabalin of headache, nausea and diarrhoea.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
Four studies in monkeys showed that pregabalin was self-administered during
initial access to the drug. Putative tolerance to the euphoric effects of pregabalin
developed, as suggested by a decrease in self-administration after one week.
There are also phase 2/3 clinical studies in humans supporting the development
of tolerance to its euphoric effects. Other preclinical conditioned place preference
studies in mice, and self-administration or drug discrimination studies in
monkeys, have yielded conflicting results, which have been attributed to varying
study conditions. In human subjects, relatively low doses of pregabalin did not
increase ratings of “like drug” or “take drug again” indicating low abuse liability.
In another study, a higher dose of pregabalin administered to recreational users
of alcohol or sedative/hypnotic drugs (n=15) was rated similar to diazepam,
indicative of abuse liability. In some clinical trials, euphoria was reported as an
adverse effect and it was dose-dependent and transient.
         Pregabalin abuse and misuse is increasing rapidly in some countries.
Abuse and misuse of pregabalin have been reported from several European
countries and countries in other regions. One country reported an escalation in
pregabalin-related deaths from 2010–2012.
         No data regarding illicit trade, its scope and magnitude are available.
However, there is evidence of illicit marketing of pregabalin for recreational
uses through online pharmacies. There are anecdotal reports of widespread
distribution in prisons in some countries. Pregabalin is under national legislation
in several countries in different regions of the world.

Therapeutic usefulness
Pregabalin has approved indications for the treatment of partial seizures,
post-herpetic neuralgia, diabetic neuropathy, fibromyalgia, spinal cord injury,
neuropathic pain and generalized anxiety disorder. Pregabalin has also been used
off-label in the treatment of drug and alcohol withdrawal. Pregabalin is not listed
on the 20th WHO Model List of Essential Medicines or the 6th WHO Model List
of Essential Medicines for Children.

Recommendation
Pregabalin, a gabapentinoid, is an analogue of GABA, but does not bind to
benzodiazepine or opioid receptors, nor does it act at GABA receptors or
synapses. Pregabalin has therapeutic uses. The increasing evidence of misuse and
abuse in many countries is becoming a growing cause for concern. Pregabalin
has been shown to have the capacity to produce a state of dependence. On this
basis, the Committee recommended that pregabalin ((3S)-3-(Aminomethyl)-
5-methylhexanoic acid) be subject to a future critical review. The Committee
requested that the Secretariat collect further data to support such a review.

5.1.15 Cannabidiol (CBD)
Substance identification
Chemically, cannabidiol is (1’R,2’R)-5’-Methyl-4-pentyl-2’-(prop-1-en-2-yl)-
1’,2’,3’,4’-tetrahydro-[1,1’-biphenyl]-2,6-diol. Cannabidiol (CBD) is normally
taken to refer to the naturally occurring (−)-enantiomer.

Previous review
Cannabidiol had not been previously pre-reviewed or critically reviewed by the
ECDD. The current review was based on the recommendation made at the thirty-
eighth meeting of the ECDD that pre-review documentation on cannabis-related
substances, including cannabidiol, be prepared and evaluated at a subsequent
Committee meeting.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
CBD does not appreciably bind to the CB1 receptor, which mediates the
behavioural activity of THC. Across a range of measures in humans and animals,
CBD has been shown to have very different effects from those of THC. In mice,
CBD fails to produce the behavioural characteristics associated with CB1 receptor
activation that THC generates (for example, suppression of locomotor activity,
hypothermia and antinociception). It does not substitute for the discriminative
stimulus effects of THC in rats or pigeons. Neuroimaging studies in humans and
animals have shown that CBD has effects that are generally opposite to those
of THC. In contrast to THC, CBD has no effect on heart rate or blood pressure
under normal conditions, but in animal models of stress it reduces heart rate
and blood pressure. It is not clear which mechanisms are responsible for any of
CBD’s potential clinical or other effects. CBD has no effect on a wide range of
physiological and biochemical parameters, nor does it have significant effects on
animal behaviour.

Dependence potential
No controlled, experimental studies directly pertinent to the potential physical
dependence effects of CBD could be identified. Tolerance to CBD, a phenomenon
associated with dependence, has not been observed.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
Several laboratory animal studies indicate that CBD does not produce effects
common to many drugs of abuse, nor more specifically to THC. It elevates
intracranial self-stimulation thresholds in rats, unlike cocaine, metamfetamine
and opioids that decrease these thresholds. Unlike THC, CBD does not increase
the firing rate of dopaminergic cells of the mesolimbic ventral tegmental area –
nucleus accumbens pathway. CBD has little effect on conditioned place preference
and does not substitute for the discriminative stimulus effects of THC.
         While the number of studies is limited, the evidence from well-controlled
human experimental research indicates that CBD is not associated with abuse
potential. Single oral-dose administrations of up to 600 mg CBD had placebo-like
effects when evaluated in healthy volunteers according to physiological measures
and on the scales of the Addiction Research Centre Inventory. In a randomized,
double-blind, within-subject laboratory study in recreational cannabis users,
oral administration of up to 800 mg CBD produced no significant psychoactive,
cardiovascular or other effects. Together, these studies indicate a low likelihood
of abuse of CBD.
         At present, there are no case reports of abuse or dependence relating to
the use of CBD. There are also no published statistics on non-medical use of
CBD. No public health problems (e.g. impaired driving) have been associated
with the use of CBD.

Therapeutic usefulness
CBD is present in nabiximols, which are marketed in several countries for the
treatment of spasticity due to multiple sclerosis. There are no currently approved
CBD-only products; however, CBD is being actively explored for a range of
indications consistent with its potential neuroprotective, antiepileptic, anxiolytic,
antipsychotic, analgesic, anti-inflammatory, anti-asthmatic and antitumor
properties. Importantly, CBD has demonstrated effectiveness in the treatment
of at least some forms of epilepsy, with one CBD product currently in advanced
clinical development. In 2015, the US Food and Drug Administration granted
Fast Track designation for intravenous CBD to treat neonatal hypoxic-ischemic
encephalopathy. The European Commission also granted orphan designation
for CBD to be used in the treatment of perinatal asphyxia. Currently there are
no other treatments available for these conditions, but there is evidence of the
effectiveness of CBD in animal models.

Recommendation
In a variety of laboratory animal and human models, preparations containing
almost exclusively CBD do not have effects typical of abuse potential. In animals,
CBD increases intracranial self-stimulation thresholds, suggestive of diminished
reward activity, and does not produce conditioned place preference. Importantly,
it has placebo-like effects when tested for its abuse liability in human subjects.
Furthermore, CBD does not have effects characteristic of THC. It does not produce
the cannabimimetic effects in the tetrad battery in mice, and does not substitute
for the discriminative stimulus effects of THC in rats. At present, there are no
case reports of abuse or dependence relating to the use of CBD. Furthermore, no
public health problems (e.g. impaired driving) have been associated with the use
of CBD.
         CBD is not specifically listed in the schedules of the 1961, 1971 or 1988
United Nations International Drug Control Conventions. There is no evidence
that CBD as a substance is liable to similar abuse and produces similar ill effects to
substances in the 1961 or 1971 Conventions (including cannabis and dronabinol
(THC), respectively). The purpose of the pre-review was to determine whether
current information justifies a critical review by the Expert Committee of
information that may justify the scheduling or a change in the scheduling of the
substance in the 1961 or 1971 Conventions. As CBD is not currently a scheduled
substance in its own right (only as a component of cannabis extracts), current
information does not justify a change in this scheduling status nor does it justify
scheduling of the substance.
         However, where CBD is produced for pharmaceutical purposes as an
extract of cannabis, cannabis extracts and tinctures are included in the 1961 UN
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs. The pre-review of cannabis extracts and
tinctures will take place at the fortieth ECDD meeting in May 2018. Therefore it
is also recommended that extracts or preparations containing almost exclusively
CBD (cannabidiol; (1’R,2’R)-5’-Methyl-4-pentyl-2’-(prop-1-en-2-yl)-1’,2’,3’,4’-
tetrahydro-[1,1’-biphenyl]-2,6-diol) be subject to critical review at that meeting.

5.1.16 Tramadol
Substance identification
Chemically, tramadol is rac-(1R,2R)-2-[(Dimethylamino)methyl]-1-(3-
methoxyphenyl)cyclohexan-1-ol. Tramadol has two chiral centres in the
cyclohexane ring, consequently, four different stereoisomers exist: (1R,2R),
(1S,2S), (1R,2S), and the (1S,2R) stereoisomer.

Previous review
Tramadol has been considered by the ECDD five times: in 1992, 2000, 2002, 2006
and 2014. The Committee reviewed tramadol most recently at its thirty-sixth
meeting in 2014, and based on the evidence available regarding dependence,
abuse and risks to public health, it recommended that a critical review of tramadol
was not warranted at that time. A pre-review of tramadol was recommended at
the thirty-ninth ECDD based on information received by the WHO Secretariat
regarding the misuse of tramadol.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Tramadol inhibits serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake, and as a serotonin
releaser whereas the O-desmethyl metabolite of tramadol (known as M1 or
ODT) acts on the μ-opioid receptor. This implies that the mechanism of action
of tramadol includes both non-opioid components – that is, noradrenergic and
serotonergic components – and opioid components. Intravenous naloxone has
been successfully used to reverse the opioid-related respiratory depressant effects
of tramadol overdose.
        Symptoms following tramadol intoxication are similar to those of
other opioid analgesics. These include CNS depression including coma, nausea
and vomiting, tachycardia, cardiovascular collapse, seizures and respiratory
depression up to respiratory arrest. Moreover, in combination with serotonergic
agents (for example, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and monoamine
oxidase inhibitors), tramadol may induce serotonin syndrome. The hyperthermia
in serotonin syndrome is potentially fatal. Because of the μ-opioid agonist activity
of O-desmethyltramadol, tramadol may lower the respiratory rate and potentially
lead to severe respiratory depression.

Dependence potential
Physical dependence on tramadol may occur. This has been shown in animal
studies, although this is not consistently seen in all studies. In rhesus monkeys,
only mild to moderate withdrawal signs have been reported. Studies show
that tramadol may lead to physical dependence in humans when used daily
for more than a few weeks. Withdrawal reactions can include restlessness,
agitation, anxiety, sweating, insomnia, hyperkinesia, tremor, paraesthesia and
gastrointestinal symptoms, consistent with opioid withdrawal. Naloxone can
precipitate withdrawal effects in tramadol-dependent subjects. In dependent
opioid abusers, intramuscular tramadol was shown to act as a mild opioid agonist,
able to suppress opioid withdrawal symptoms, although not to a statistically
significant degree, comparable to hydromorphone.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
Based on animal studies, tramadol is an atypical opioid analgesic with mild
opioid-like effects. Tramadol is weakly self-administered by monkeys and rats,
and less robustly than morphine. Animal studies of tramadol are of uncertain
value as they have used predominantly parenteral routes of administration and
the extent of formation of the O-desmethyl metabolite across species is not
known. Controlled, human laboratory studies indicate that tramadol has a low
abuse potential relative to morphine. Moreover, mild opioid-like effects are seen
following oral administration of tramadol, but are not produced by parenteral
administration. Overall, tramadol appears to have a low abuse potential relative
to the prototypic opioid, morphine.
        Few cases of fatal poisoning due to tramadol alone have been reported.
Most cases of intoxication involved co‐ingestion of other drugs or alcohol.
Symptoms following tramadol intoxication are similar to those of other opioid
analgesics.
        There is growing abuse of tramadol in some African and west Asian
countries, as evidenced by large seizures, predominantly of tablets, in north and
west Africa. Abuse of tramadol has become a serious problem in several Middle-
Eastern countries. Data provided by the UNODC (July 2017) on global tramadol
seizures show a steady rise in seizures between 2007 and 2015. Several countries
have brought tramadol under some form of national legislation.

Therapeutic usefulness
Tramadol is used to treat both acute and chronic pain of moderate to severe
intensity. Tramadol is available worldwide as a medicine. It is mentioned as a
step-2 analgesic in the WHO guidelines for cancer pain relief. Tramadol is listed
on several national essential medicines lists, but it is not listed on the 20th WHO
Model List of Essential Medicines or the 6th WHO Model List of Essential
Medicines for Children.

Recommendation
Tramadol is used as a medication for controlling moderate acute and chronic
painful conditions, and it is listed in several national essential medicines lists. It
produces opioid‐like effects predominantly through the conversion of tramadol
into its active metabolite. There is growing evidence of abuse of tramadol in
many countries, in some cases serious, accompanied by adverse reactions and
tramadol-associated deaths. The Committee recommended that tramadol ((rac-
(1R,2R)-2-[(Dimethylamino)methyl]-1-(3-methoxyphenyl)cyclohexan-1-ol) be
subject to a critical review at a subsequent meeting. The Committee requested the
Secretariat to collect additional data for the critical review, including engagement
with Member States to obtain information on the extent of problems associated
with tramadol misuse. Also, the Committee asked for information on the medical
use of tramadol including the extent to which developing countries, and aid and
relief agencies, use and possibly rely on tramadol for provision of analgesia.
