
6.1.1 Cannabidiol
Substance identification
Chemically, cannabidiol (CBD) is 2-[(6R)-3-methyl-6-prop-1-en-2-ylcyclohex-
2-en-1-yl]-5-pentylbenzene-1,3-diol. CBD is one of the naturally occurring
cannabinoids found in cannabis plants. It is a 21-carbon terpenophenolic
compound that is formed following decarboxylation from a cannabidiolic acid
(CBDA) precursor, although it can also be produced synthetically. CBD has
two stereoisomers but is normally taken to refer to the naturally occurring
(−)-enantiomer. (+)-CBD has been synthesized but has received little attention.

Chemistry
In plants, Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ9-THC) and CBD are derived from
their acidic precursors Δ9- tetrahydrocannabinolic acid (THCA) and CBDA,
respectively. Subsequent decarboxylation of THCA and CBDA via light exposure,
heating or ageing, results in Δ9-THC or CBD. Synthetic routes are available to
produce CBD, but some of the published methods yield only small amounts.
There are several published methods for the analytical detection of CBD in
various biological samples.

Ease of convertibility into controlled substances
There is some evidence that CBD can be converted in the laboratory to
Δ9-THC, which is controlled under the 1971 United Nations Convention on
Psychotropic Substances. The laboratory conversion of CBD to Δ9-THC results
in a preparation of uncertain purity. There is limited in vitro evidence that this
conversion can occur spontaneously in the presence of acid. Overall, however,
there is no evidence that this transformation occurs in humans after oral CBD
administration

General pharmacology
In clinical trials and research studies, CBD is generally administered orally as
either a capsule or dissolved in an oil solution (for example, olive or sesame
oil). Probably due to its poor solubility in water, the absorption of CBD from
the gastrointestinal tract is erratic, and the resulting pharmacokinetic profile is
variable. CBD is extensively metabolized in the liver and, as a result, bioavailability
from oral delivery is estimated to be only 6%. CBD may preferentially accumulate
in adipose tissues due to its high lipophilicity. In in vitro models, CBD has
been shown to modify concentrations of other drugs through the inhibition of
cytochrome P450 (CYP) isozymes, but it is not clear whether the same effects
occur with clinical doses.
       There are two types of cannabinoid (CB) receptors: CB1, which are primarily
located in the central nervous system with some expression in peripheral tissues,
and CB2, which can be found in the periphery on cells with immune function, in
the gastrointestinal tract, and at low densities in the central nervous system. CBD
does not appear to act directly at CB1 receptors, and most studies find no agonist
effects at this receptor. CBD also shows low affinity at CB2 receptors.
       In human and animal studies, CBD has been shown to have very different
effects from those of Δ9-THC. In mice, CBD fails to produce the behavioural
characteristics (for example, suppression of locomotor activity, hypothermia,
antinociception) associated with CB1 activation, whereas Δ9-THC generates all
the effects that occur when CB1 is activated. Neuroimaging studies in humans and
animals have shown that CBD has effects that are generally opposite to those of
Δ9-THC. In contrast to Δ9-THC, CBD does not affect heart rate or blood pressure
under normal conditions. CBD may interact with the endocannabinoid system
through indirect mechanisms and several non-endocannabinoid signalling
systems as well, but it is not clear which, if any, of these other mechanisms are
responsible for any of CBD’s potential clinical or other effects.

Toxicology
In general, CBD has been found to have low toxicity, although studies are limited
and not all potential effects have been explored.

Adverse reactions in humans
CBD does not produce the effects that are typically seen with Δ9-THC. CBD
has been found to be generally well tolerated with a good safety profile across
several controlled and open-label trials investigating its potential therapeutic
effects. Adverse events reported in clinical studies investigating the therapeutic
possibilities of CBD have included, but have not been limited to, somnolence,
decreased appetite, diarrhoea and fatigue.

Dependence potential
It was not possible to identify any reports on controlled studies of the physical
dependence potential of CBD in laboratory animals or humans. Tolerance to
CBD has not been observed.

Abuse potential
Several laboratory animal studies indicate that CBD does not produce effects
common to many drugs of abuse, nor, more specifically, effects comparable to
those of Δ9-THC. In particular, unlike other drugs of abuse, it does not activate
the mesolimbic dopamine (reward) pathway in the brain or potentiate the effect
of rewarding electrical stimulation. CBD fails to show an effect in the conditioned
place preference model of reinforcement, and its effects do not resemble those of
Δ9-THC in the drug discrimination model of subjective drug effects.
       Clinical studies have shown that even high doses of oral CBD do not cause
Δ9-THC-like effects (for example, impairment of cognitive and psychomotor
function, increased heart rate/tachycardia and dry mouth). When evaluated in
healthy volunteers, administration of single oral doses of up to 600 mg of CBD
had placebo-like effects on physiological measures and on the scales of the
Addiction Research Centre Inventory. In a randomized, double-blind, within-
subject laboratory study in recreational cannabis users, CBD produced no
significant psychoactive, cardiovascular or other effects at doses up to 800 mg
orally. Overall, there is no evidence that oral CBD administration in humans
results in clinically relevant Δ9-THC-like subjective or physiological effects. Co-
administration of oral CBD does not affect the intensity of Δ9-THC subjective
effects. There are no case reports of abuse or dependence relating to the use of
CBD.

Therapeutic applications, extent of therapeutic use and
        epidemiology of medical use
CBD is presently marketed in several countries in combination with Δ9-THC
in a 1:1 ratio (Sativex®). CBD is in development for a variety of therapeutic
applications including schizophrenia, fragile X syndrome, encephalopathies,
childhood absence seizures, neonatal hypoxic–ischaemic encephalopathy and
perinatal asphyxia. The clinical use of CBD is most advanced in the treatment of
epilepsy. In clinical trials, CBD has demonstrated effectiveness for treating at least
some forms of epilepsy, with one pure CBD product (Epidiolex®) found effective
in clinical studies of Lennox-Gastaut syndrome (a severe form of epileptic
encephalopathy that produces various types of seizures) and Dravet syndrome (a
complex childhood epilepsy disorder that has a high mortality rate), which are
often resistant to other forms of medication.
       In 2015, the US FDA granted fast-track designation for intravenous CBD
to treat neonatal hypoxic–ischaemic encephalopathy. The European Commission
also granted orphan designation for CBD to be used in the treatment of perinatal
asphyxia. Currently there are no other treatments available for these conditions,
but there is evidence of the effectiveness of CBD in animal models.

Listing in the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines
Cannabidiol is not listed in the WHO EML (20th list) or the WHO Model List of
Essential Medicines for Children (6th list).

Marketing authorizations (as a medicinal product)
One pure CBD product (Epidiolex®) was under consideration for
registration at the time of the ECDD meeting. There are several other CBD
products in development.

Industrial use
Pure CBD has no legitimate industrial uses.

Non-medical use, abuse and dependence
There are no case reports of abuse or dependence relating to the non-medical use
of pure CBD. CBD-based products are, however, used for a variety of medical
indications in preparations that are not regulated by pharmaceutical authorities.

Nature and magnitude of public health problems related to
     misuse, abuse and dependence
No public health problems (for example, driving under the influence of drugs,
harm to health or comorbidities) have been associated with the use of pure CBD.

Licit production, consumption and international trade
Licit production for medical research is described in section 6.11 (Marketing
authorizations).

Illicit manufacture and traffic and related information
There are no published statistics (for example, country data on seizures of illicit
CBD) available.

Current international controls and their impact
CBD is not explicitly specified for inclusion in the schedules of the 1961 and the
1971 United Nations International Drug Control Conventions, nor is it included
in the List of precursors and chemicals frequently used in the illicit manufacture
of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances (6) under the United Nations
Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
of 1988. However, if prepared as an extract or tincture of cannabis it is controlled
in Schedule I of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961.

Current and past national controls
Several countries have CBD under some form of regulatory control. However,
some have relaxed their control in recent years, in part to make CBD more
accessible for medical use or research.

WHO review history
A pre-review of CBD was undertaken during the thirty-ninth meeting of the
ECDD in November 2017 following a recommendation from the thirty-eighth
ECDD that pre-review documentation on cannabis-related substances, including
CBD, be prepared and evaluated at a subsequent Committee meeting. Following
its pre-review at the thirty-ninth ECDD meeting, the Committee recommended
that extracts and preparations containing almost exclusively CBD be subject to
critical review at the fortieth meeting of the ECDD.

Recommendation
CBD is one of the naturally occurring cannabinoids found in cannabis plants.
There are no case reports of abuse or dependence relating to the use of pure CBD.
No public health problems have been associated with CBD use.
       CBD has been found to be generally well tolerated and to have a good
safety profile. Adverse effects of CBD use include loss of appetite, diarrhoea and
fatigue.
       Therapeutic applications of CBD are being researched for a variety of
clinical uses. Research in this area is most advanced in the treatment of epilepsy.
In clinical trials, one pure CBD product has demonstrated effectiveness for
treating some forms of epilepsy, such as Lennox-Gastaut syndrome and Dravet
syndrome, which are often resistant to other forms of medication.
       CBD is not specifically listed in the schedules of the 1961, 1971 or 1988
United Nations International Drug Control Conventions. However, if prepared
as an extract or tincture, it is controlled under Schedule I of the 1961 Single
Convention on Narcotic Drugs.
       There is no evidence that CBD as a substance is liable to similar abuse
or leads to similar ill-effects to substances controlled under the 1961 or 1971
Conventions such as cannabis or Δ9-THC, respectively.
       The Committee recommended that preparations considered to be pure
CBD should not be scheduled.

7.1.1 Cannabis and cannabis resin
Substance identification
- Cannabis plant
  The flowering or fruiting tops of the cannabis plant (excluding the seeds and
leaves when not accompanied by the tops) from which the resin has not been
extracted.
- Cannabis resin
  The separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from the cannabis plant.

Chemistry
Cannabis sativa (C. sativa) is one of the world’s oldest cultivated plants. Cannabis
is an annual flowering plant, generally dioecious (i.e. with the male and female
flowers on separate plants), although monoecious plants, where the male and
female flowers are on the same plant, can also be found. To date, more than
500 naturally occurring compounds have been identified in the cannabis plant,
including cannabinoids (more than 100 chemicals unique to the plant), terpenoids
and alkaloids. Cannabis contains a characteristic class of terpenophenolic
secondary metabolites, named phytocannabinoids to distinguish them from
synthetic and endogenous cannabinoids. To date, 120 phytocannabinoids have
been recorded for C. sativa, and can be classified into 11 general types. Δ9-
tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ9-THC) and CBD are the most important of the plant
cannabinoids. Δ9-THC is thought to be the principal intoxicant constituent of
C. sativa. In plants, Δ9-THC and CBD are derived from their acidic precursors
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinolic acid (THCA) and CBDA, respectively. Subsequent
decarboxylation of THCA and CBDA, via light exposure, heating or ageing,
results in Δ9-THC or CBD. Concentrations of Δ9-THC or THCA contained in
cannabis vary across strains and across the plant itself, with resin (i.e. hashish)
and unfertilized female flowers (i.e. sinsemilla) having higher concentrations
than other parts such as the leaf. Once dried, the foliage and floral material are
stripped from the stalk and twigs, which are almost devoid of cannabinoids. The
resinous secretions of the plant, which are produced in the glandular trichomes,
can be collected to yield a product with a higher concentration of Δ9-THC than
occurs in the whole plant inflorescence. In addition to the secretions, cannabis
resin consists of finer plant material and appears as a loose or pressed sticky
powder, depending on the method of production.

Ease of convertibility into controlled substances
Not applicable.

General pharmacology
Cannabis tops and cannabis resin (i.e. hashish) are typically administered via
inhalation after combustion (i.e. by smoking). Most of the existing research
on the pharmacokinetics of cannabis has focused on Δ9-THC. Records from
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the USA show
that average concentrations of Δ9-THC contained in cannabis plants bred for
non-medical use have increased over time (from approximately 4% in 1995
to approximately 12% in 2014). Some cannabis plants bred for medicinal use
may have decreased concentrations of Δ9-THC and increased concentrations
of CBD. Absorption of Δ9-THC in smoked cannabis is rapid, and measurable
levels are observed in plasma within seconds after the first puff. Bioavailability
of Δ9-THC after cannabis smoking ranges from 10 to 56%. This percentage is
affected by dose, history of use and individual differences in physiology. It also
depends on factors such as smoking topography and efficiency. Δ9-THC has an
active metabolite, 11-hydroxy-Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (11-OH-Δ9-THC). The
principal metabolite, 11-nor-carboxy-Δ9-THC, is inactive.
       Body fat serves as a storage reservoir for Δ9-THC, particularly in people
who consume the drug daily or almost daily. Among such people Δ9-THC is
eliminated slowly from fat tissues.
       The pharmacokinetics of CBD and other minor phytocannabinoids
contained in the cannabis plant, including cannabinol, cannabigerol and
tetrahydrocannabivarin, following smoking of cannabis, resemble the pattern
observed with Δ9-THC.
       Psychoactive effects of cannabis associated with its abuse are mediated via
Δ9-THC interaction with the endocannabinoid system in the brain. Specifically,
Δ9-THC is a partial agonist at CB1 receptors. Δ9-THC is also an agonist at the
CB2 receptor, which mediates some of its peripheral effects. Cannabis/Δ9-THC
interaction with other major neurotransmitter systems (such as dopamine,
opioid) is mainly indirect through the interplay of these systems with the
endocannabinoid system. The pharmacological effects of minor cannabinoids
(for example, tetrahydrocannabivarin, cannabigerol and cannabichromene) have
not been studied in detail.
       A hypothesis that other cannabis plant constituents may interact with
Δ -THC and alter its effects is referred to as the “entourage effect”. So far, no clear
scientific support for this hypothesis with regard to Δ9-THC psychoactive effects
has been published.

Toxicology
Most of the evidence on the toxicology of cannabis comes from observational
population studies from which causation cannot be inferred. Cardiovascular
effects of cannabis appear minimal or transient. Initial ingestion promotes
tachycardia and increases blood pressure, but this subsides with tolerance and
may even result in the opposite effects. There is limited evidence for a modestly
increased risk of myocardial infarction associated with cannabis use. Smoking
cannabis is linked to the typical ill-effects of smoking any substance, including
the risk of chronic bronchitis.
       Maternal cannabis users give birth to babies with birthweights that are on
average 109 g lower than those born to mothers who do not use cannabis. There
is limited evidence for a modest increase in the risk of birth defects. Impaired
brain development, as demonstrated by poor connectivity, may contribute to the
association between early, regular cannabis use and a decline in IQ, although the
extent of these cognitive difficulties appears equivocal. Cannabis smoking has
been reported to lead to a 2.5-fold increase in the risk of testicular cancer.

Adverse reactions in humans
The acute consumption of cannabis can induce euphoria, laughter and
talkativeness, change sensory and time perception, and compromise motor
control and judgement. It can stimulate appetite and promote dry mouth and
dizziness. Acute cannabis use impairs certain types of cognitive function and can
interfere with attention, learning and memory. It can also precipitate a short-
lasting psychotic state in healthy individuals, which reverses once the effects
of the drug have abated. Cannabis can impair driving skills and people driving
under the influence of cannabis are 20–30% more likely to be involved in a car
accident. Children who consume cannabis are at risk of possible respiratory
depression, tachycardia and coma.
       Most of the adverse effects associated with cannabis result from chronic
use, according to data accumulated among recreational (non-medical) users.
Chronic regular (daily or near daily) cannabis use is particularly problematic
for young people, whose brains continue to develop into their mid-twenties.
A modest proportion of people who initiate cannabis use in adolescence show
decreased IQ (by as much as 8 points when cannabis is used from the ages of 13
to 38 years). Regular cannabis use is associated with an increased risk of anxiety,
depression and psychotic illness, and cannabis use may worsen the course of
these disorders. Population studies report that cannabis use leads to a twofold
increase in the risk of schizophrenia, although the majority of cannabis users
will not develop a psychotic disorder and those who do are likely to have some
genetic vulnerability to cannabis-induced psychosis. Regular cannabis use may
be associated with poor school performance, lower income, increased likelihood
of requiring socioeconomic assistance, unemployment, criminal behaviour and
decreased satisfaction with life.

Dependence potential
The number of studies investigating physical dependence potential in laboratory
animals is limited. When exposed to cannabis smoke, mice and rats can be made
physically dependent, and withdrawal effects can be reversed by intravenous
administration of Δ9-THC. However, rhesus monkeys exposed to cannabis
smoke once daily or twice weekly for one year did not show behavioural signs of
withdrawal upon abrupt termination.
        Human users of cannabis can become physically dependent, and clinical
diagnostic manuals such as the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, fifth edition (DSM-5) and the International Classification of Diseases,
tenth revision (ICD-10) recognize the existence of a cannabis use disorder. It is
estimated that the percentage of regular cannabis users who have experienced at
least one episode of cannabis withdrawal during abstinence ranges from 16 to
33%. The onset of withdrawal typically occurs within 24 to 48 hours of abstinence
following a period of regular use, with peak intensity usually occurring 2 to 6 days
after last use. The withdrawal syndrome may include mood changes, irritability,
increased anger, anxiety, craving, restlessness, sleep impairment, stomach pain
and decreased appetite.

Abuse potential
Preclinical research on cannabis smoke has been limited. Mice exposed to cannabis
smoke show typical effects of Δ9-THC including catalepsy, antinociception,
hypothermia and hypolocomotion, and these effects can be antagonized by the
CB1 receptor antagonist, rimonabant.
       In humans, self-reported subjective effects associated with smoked
cannabis in laboratory studies include dose-dependent increases in ratings
of “drug effect”, “high” or “stoned”. The reinforcing effects of smoked cannabis
have been demonstrated in several laboratory-based self-administration studies
with smoked cannabis being readily self-administered by experienced users.
Similar effects are produced by Δ9-THC alone when administered orally or when
smoked. Increases in the intensity of self-reported subjective effects of cannabis
(for example, “high” or “stoned”) are associated with increasing concentrations
of Δ9-THC.

Therapeutic applications, extent of therapeutic use and
        epidemiology of medical use
Several countries have laws on medicinal cannabis in effect. An international
survey of 953 medicinal cannabis users from 31 countries found that most of
them were current users under the care of a health professional and had been
using cannabis-based medications for several years. The five medical conditions
for which cannabis and cannabis-based medications were most often used as a
treatment in this survey were back pain, sleep disorders, depression, post-injury
pain and multiple sclerosis.
       Research on the potential medical applications of cannabis is ongoing. The
results of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) show that smoked cannabis can
enhance weight gain in HIV patients (1 RCT) and treat neuropathic pain (3 RCTs).
Inhaled aerosolized cannabis leads to dose-dependent reductions in spontaneous
pain ratings among patients with treatment-refractory pain due to diabetic
peripheral neuropathy. Two open-label, uncontrolled, observational studies of
smoked cannabis or vaporized cannabis reported significantly decreased motor
disability and pain scores in patients with Parkinson’s disease.

Listing on the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines
Cannabis plant and cannabis resin are not included in the WHO EML (20th list)
or the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines for Children (6th list).

Marketing authorizations (as a medicinal product)
Bedrocan Cannabis has been granted marketing authorization in the Netherlands
to produce five standardized plant varieties (whole dried flower) that are available
to patients under direct physician care. Cannabis for both medicinal and research
use is available in several countries.

Industrial use
Low potency (0.2–0.3% Δ9-THC) cannabis plants (hemp) are cultivated to
produce paper, textiles, rope or twine, and construction materials based on fibre
from stalks. Grain from industrial hemp is used in food products, cosmetics,
plastics and fuel. Cannabis plants grown for these purposes are excluded from
control under the 1961 Convention.

Non-medical use, abuse and dependence
Non-medical cannabis use is global, with an estimated prevalence of 3.8% in 2015,
which means more than 183 million adults used cannabis in that year. Prevalence
can vary widely across countries, from less than 1% to over 38%. The estimates of
the risk of developing cannabis use disorder among users vary among studies and
countries, but it appears that 1 in 10 or 1 in 11 is a representative figure.

Nature and magnitude of public health problems related to
     misuse, abuse and dependence
The global burden of disease attributable to cannabis use disorder, expressed in
disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) (one DALY represents one year of life lost
either due to premature mortality or due to living with disability) was 646 480
DALYs in 2016. Driving under the influence of cannabis increases the risk of
accidents and is therefore a public health threat.

Licit production, consumption and international trade
This is addressed under Section 7.11 (Marketing authorizations (as a medicinal
product)).

Illicit manufacture and traffic and related information
Cannabis is the most widely illicitly produced drug worldwide, cultivated in at
least 135 countries covering 92% of the global population. Cannabis seizures
made up 53% of all drug seizures worldwide in 2015.

Current international controls and their impact
Cannabis, cannabis resin, extracts and tinctures of cannabis are grouped together
in Schedule I of the 1961 United Nations Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs.
Cannabis plants and resin are also under Schedule IV of this Convention, which
contains substances that are particularly liable to abuse and to produce ill-effects
and do not have therapeutic advantages that offset these effects.

Current and past national controls
Cannabis, including plants and resin, is controlled in most WHO Member States.
A growing number of countries, however, have endorsed regulations enabling
the medical use of cannabis plants to relieve the symptoms of specific medical
conditions. The European Medicines Agency has stated that the use of cannabis
as medicine must follow the laws of each member.

WHO review history
Cannabis and cannabis resin have not previously been formally reviewed by the
ECDD.

Recommendation
Cannabis is defined as the flowering tops or separated resin of the C. sativa plant.
Cannabis contains 121 reported phytocannabinoids, the most prominent being
Δ9-THC and CBD. Δ9-THC is thought to be the principal intoxicant constituent
of cannabis.
        When used acutely, cannabis causes adverse effects such as dizziness and
impairment of motor control and cognitive function. Cannabis use can impair
driving. There are particular risks reported for children, such as respiratory
depression, tachycardia and coma. The adverse effects of cannabis consumption
are similar to those produced by Δ9-THC alone.
        Most of the adverse effects associated with cannabis result from chronic
use. Regular cannabis use is associated with increased risk of mental health
disorders such as anxiety, depression and psychotic illness. Chronic regular
cannabis use is particularly problematic for young people as a result of its effects
on the developing brain.
        Cannabis can cause physical dependence in humans as evidenced by the
onset of cannabis withdrawal symptoms upon abstinence. Withdrawal symptoms
include mood changes, irritability and sleep impairment. Clinical diagnostic
guidelines such as DSM-5 and ICD-10 recognize cannabis use disorder.
        The Committee considered information regarding the therapeutic
indications of cannabis and ongoing research into its possible medical
applications. Several countries permit the use of cannabis for the treatment of
medical conditions such as back pain, sleep disorders, depression, post-injury
pain and multiple sclerosis.
        Cannabis plant and cannabis resin are included in Schedule I and Schedule
IV of the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs. Substances that are included
in both these schedules are particularly liable to abuse and to produce ill-effects.
Other substances that are included in both Schedules I and IV are fentanyl
analogues and other opioids that are considered especially dangerous.
        The evidence presented to the Committee did not indicate that cannabis
plant and cannabis resin were liable to produce ill-effects similar to the other
substances in Schedule IV of the 1961 Convention on Narcotic Drugs. The
inclusion of cannabis and cannabis resin in Schedule IV may not be consistent
with the criteria for inclusion in Schedule IV.
        The Committee concluded that there is sufficient evidence to recommend
a critical review of cannabis plant and cannabis resin at a future ECDD meeting
and to explore further the appropriateness of their current scheduling within the
1961 Convention.

8.1.1 Extracts and tinctures of cannabis
Substance identification
Extracts and tinctures of cannabis are preparations that have been extracted
from the leaves and flowers of C. sativa. They include oils, rosin, distillates and
pharmaceutical products containing a mixture of Δ9-THC and CBD.

Chemistry
Cannabis extracts
         There are several methods for preparing the different cannabis extracts (i.e.
extract mixtures from the leaves and flowers of C. sativa). These include:
        ■■ Supercritical carbon dioxide (CO2) extraction
		 Cannabis inflorescence is treated with supercritical CO2, which is
   highly pressurized liquid CO2. The extract is separated from the CO2
   that is recovered and passed back through the cannabis inflorescence
   several times until the extraction process is complete. The most sig-
   nificant advantage of CO2 extraction is that it leaves no harmful resi-
   dues in the resulting product.
  ■■ Butane hash oil (BHO)
		 BHO is a resinous, nonpolar extract of cannabis inflorescence made
     using butane as a solvent, which is eventually purged under vacuum
     at room temperature. The final extract can contain from 50 to 90% of
     the active ingredient, either (−)-trans-delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
     (Δ9- THC) or CBD. The terpene content ranges from 0.1 to 34%, but
     this can be increased by dipping BHO in a vial of terpenes prior to
     use (“terpene dipping”).
  ■■ Propane hash oil (PHO)
		 PHO is similar to BHO, but it uses propane as the solvent.
  ■■ Rosin
		 The rosin method exploits heat and pressure to squeeze a resinous
     product from the plant material. Industrial-sized presses capable
     of processing large amounts of hashish oil within seconds are
     available. As no solvent is used in the process, it is not an extract or
             tincture according to the usual definitions, but is included here for
             completeness.
 ■■ Distillates
		 Distillates are concentrated extracts of cannabis inflorescence
    through which a specific solvent passes and collects cannabinoids
    and terpenes.
  ■■ Other organic extracts
		 Other hydrocarbon solvents that can be employed for cannabis
     extraction include chloroform and hexane. Oils such as olive oil or
     sesame oil may also be used.

Tinctures of cannabis
The tinctures of cannabis are extracts of the flowering tops or other parts of C.
sativa where alcohol (ethanol) is used as the solvent. Ethanol is a very effective
solvent for the extraction of most of the substances contained in cannabis
inflorescences. It has a high extraction efficiency and is more effective than water
and hydrocarbon solvents (for example, hexane).
  ■■ Cannabis oils
		 Cannabis oils may contain Δ9-THC and other cannabinoids obtained
     using a method of extraction as described above. However, some oils,
     such as essential oil and hemp seed oil, do not contain significant
     concentrations of Δ9-THC. Medicinal cannabis oil is an extraction of
     C. sativa typically made with olive oil or sesame oil, which is used in
     pharmacy for the preparation of medicinal extracts.
  ■■ Aqueous extracts
		 An aqueous extract of C. sativa is often referred to as a tea. The use
     of boiling water is a simple and probably one of the oldest methods
     for preparing a cannabis extract for oral administration. The amount
     of Δ9-THC extracted using this method is only a fraction of that
     obtainable using other extraction methods. To compensate for the
     low solubility of Δ9-THC in water, users of tea often add a small
     amount of vegetable oil or butter and increase boiling time.
  ■■ CBD in preparations with other cannabis-related ingredients.
		 Sativex® is a pharmaceutical formulation manufactured in the United
     Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland by incorporating
     purified botanically derived drug substances containing an accurately
   measured 1:1 ratio of Δ9-THC and CBD into a final product containing
   ethanol, propylene glycol and peppermint oil as excipients. Sativex®
   is in the form of an oromucosal spray approved for treating spasticity
   in patients with multiple sclerosis. Each 0.1 mL spray contains 2.7
   mg of Δ9-THC and 2.5 mg of CBD. Two cannabis plant strains are
   grown under regulated glasshouse conditions, principally producing
   Δ9-THC and CBD. The dried plant material, including the foliage and
   inflorescence, is uniformly heated to decarboxylate the precursors,
   THCA and CBDA, to Δ9-THC and CBD, respectively. The plant
   material is then extracted by supercritical liquid CO2 extraction to
   obtain the two soft extracts with trade names Tetranabinex (>90%
   Δ9-THC) and Nabidiolex (>85% CBD).
		 One or more of a variety of methods can be used for detection of the
   presence of cannabinoids in these substances. These methods include
   colour tests, thin-layer chromatography, gas chromatography, liquid
   chromatography, nuclear magnetic resonance and immunoassay.

Ease of convertibility into controlled substances
Not applicable.

General pharmacology
In humans, cannabis extracts may be delivered through various routes of
administration, including sublingual, oral, inhalation (smoking or vaping), rectal
and transdermal. “Dosage” of cannabis extracts most often refers to the amount
of Δ9-THC contained in the preparation. Tinctures are usually administered
sublingually or used to infuse edibles or beverages (i.e. oral administration). Oils
may be incorporated into food or beverages for oral administration or may be
vaped or “dabbed”. Sativex® is formulated into an oromucosal spray.
       In the few studies that have been done, pharmacokinetic profiles of vaped
versus smoked cannabis/cannabis extracts appear to be similar. Absorption of
Δ9-THC from inhalation is rapid and measurable levels are observed in plasma
within seconds after the first puff. While peak plasma levels typically occur within
3–10 minutes after smoking, peak “highs” do not occur until 20–30 minutes
after smoking. Absorption of Δ9-THC following oral ingestion is slower and
maximal plasma levels are lower, typically resulting in flatter concentration–time
curves. The pharmacokinetics of CBD and Δ9-THC in Sativex® are similar. The
metabolism of Δ9-THC and CBD is described elsewhere in this report.
       To date, more than 500 naturally occurring compounds have been
identified in cannabis, including cannabinoids (more than 100 chemicals unique
to the plant), terpenoids and alkaloids. However, except for Δ9-THC and CBD
(in some plants), most of these compounds are present in the plant in relatively
small quantities. In addition, the extraction process is designed to concentrate
the desired constituents (usually Δ9-THC and/or CBD). Hence, the degree to
which other compounds may contribute to the array of pharmacological and
behavioural effects produced by cannabis extracts is largely unknown. However,
because many extracts that may be used for smoking or vapour inhalation
contain high concentrations of THC, there is the potential for relatively strong
and immediate effects of Δ9-THC.

Toxicology
Little information is available on the toxicology of cannabis extracts, tinctures,
oils and tea. The toxicity produced by Δ9-THC-rich cannabis extracts, tinctures,
oils and tea are similar to those observed with Δ9-THC, but, as noted above, the
effects may be more pronounced with greater risk of adverse effects when extracts
with high Δ9-THC concentrations are inhaled.
        Depending on the method used, cannabis extract may contain residual
solvents (naphtha, isopropanol, acetone, hexane, ethyl alcohol or butane) that are
harmful if ingested by the user. Some are found to contain contaminants such as
pesticides. Thinning agents such as propylene glycol and polyethylene glycol 400
(used to allow smooth flow of viscous cannabis oils from cartridges) can produce
high concentrations of toxic acetaldehyde and formaldehyde when heated in
certain devices. In addition, terpenes can be converted to the toxic degradants
methacrolein (an irritant) and benzene (a carcinogen).
        Sativex® appears not to be mutagenic, carcinogenic or teratogenic.

Adverse reactions in humans
Adverse reactions to Δ9-THC-rich cannabis extracts, tinctures, oils and tea are
similar to those observed with Δ9-THC, but, as noted above, the effects may be
more pronounced with greater risk of adverse effects when extracts with high Δ9-
THC concentrations are inhaled.
       Common adverse effects of Sativex® are mild to moderate dizziness and
fatigue. Other common side-effects are nausea and vomiting, hypotension,
somnolence, disturbance of attention, confusion, asthenia (weakness), dry
mouth, diarrhoea, anxiety and headache. Transient adverse effects such as
increased heart rate and blood pressure, disorientation, depression, euphoria,
transient psychotic reactions and dissociation have also been reported. In rare
instances, oromucosal sprays may cause pain, discomfort, distorted taste, mouth
ulceration and glossodynia (burning sensation in the mouth and tongue). There
are no reported cases of driving under the influence of Sativex®.

Dependence potential
There are no published scientific studies that have evaluated the dependence
potential of pure cannabis extracts or Sativex® in laboratory animals. However, the
psychoactive constituent, Δ9-THC, present in most extracts, has been separately
examined and shown to have dependence potential. Frequent BHO use among
cannabis users has been associated with physical dependence and perceived
impaired control over cannabis use.
       The dependence potential of Sativex® has not been evaluated in humans.
However, there is limited evidence of a withdrawal syndrome associated with
Sativex® treatment. When a mistake in a trial led to a 2-week period of abstinence,
44% of participants experienced one or more signs associated with withdrawal
(for example, sleep disruption, appetite changes, mood changes or vivid dreams).

Abuse potential
There are few published reports of studies that have evaluated the abuse potential
of cannabis extracts in animals. When injected and when inhaled via modified
e-cigarette apparatus, cannabis extract produced Δ9-THC-like behavioural effects
in rodents. In one study, when cannabis extract was inhaled via a vaporizer, it
produced place preference in a conditioned place preference procedure. There is
evidence from animal studies indicating the abuse potential of Δ9-THC as a pure
substance whereas CBD does not have abuse potential.
       Vaping and smoking routes are known to produce rapid psychoactive effects.
However, the abuse potential of high-potency cannabis extracts administered via
vaporizing has not been studied in humans. In drug-naive healthy volunteers, an
orally administered cannabis extract containing a 2:1 ratio of Δ9-THC to CBD
induced fatigue, drowsiness, dizziness and feeling “high”.
       A clinical trial to evaluate the abuse potential of Sativex® in recreational
cannabis users showed that high doses (21.6 or 43.2 mg) of Δ9-THC induced
cannabis-like effects, but this did not occur at a lower dose. Abuse has not been
reported in post-market surveillance of Sativex®. However, euphoria has been
reported as an adverse effect of Sativex®.

Therapeutic applications, extent of therapeutic use and
        epidemiology of medical use
Sativex® is being investigated for a variety of indications including, but not
limited to, treatment of spasticity due to multiple sclerosis, chronic pain, anxiety
disorder, cannabis use disorder, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, and
depression and sleep disorders.

Listing on the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines
Cannabis extracts and tinctures are not listed on the WHO EML (20th list) or the
WHO Model List of Essential Medicines for Children (6th list).

Marketing authorizations (as a medicinal product)
Sativex® has been granted marketing authorization for treatment of spasticity due
to multiple sclerosis in at least 20 countries.

Industrial use
Cannabis extracts and tinctures have no known industrial uses.

Non-medical use, abuse and dependence
Worldwide, cannabis is mainly used in the forms of herbs and resins for
recreational (non-medical) purposes or self-medication; extracts and tinctures
are thought to play a smaller role.
       A global online survey in several countries reported that 7% of the past-
year cannabis users had used BHO. Two surveys conducted in the USA found
rates of vaporization of cannabis oil and wax of 15.5% and 10.2% among lifetime
cannabis users and 22.9% and 14.8% among those with lifetime e-cigarette use,
respectively. An additional study in the USA found that among past-year cannabis
users, 44% (n = 121) had used BHO in the previous 12 months and that frequent
BHO use was associated with higher levels of physical dependence. There are no
reports of misuse of pharmaceutical products containing a mixture of Δ9-THC
and CBD.

Nature and magnitude of public health problems related to
     misuse, abuse and dependence
The public health problems related to the use of cannabis extracts and tinctures
are difficult to assess, in part because existing reports rarely specify the form of
cannabis used. There is some evidence linking the use of butane cannabis oil
to dependence. The risk of burns has been reported during the preparation of
extracts where solvents are used.

Licit production, consumption and international trade
Licit production is important for medical research into the therapeutic potential
of cannabis preparations.

Illicit manufacture and traffic and related information
There is evidence of the illicit marketing of cannabis extracts and tinctures for
recreational (non-medical) uses through online pharmacies. Cannabis extracts
are extensively described on Internet forums and are offered for sale via the
Internet.

Current international controls and their impact
Cannabis extracts and tinctures of cannabis are listed in Schedule I of the Single
Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961.

Current and past national controls
Cannabis, including its extracts and tinctures, is controlled in most Member
States. A growing number of countries, however, have adopted regulations that
enable the medical use of cannabis extracts and tinctures to relieve the symptoms
of specific medical conditions.

WHO review history
Cannabis extracts and tinctures have never been formally reviewed by the ECDD.

Recommendation
Extracts and tinctures of cannabis are substances that have been extracted
from the C. sativa plant. They include cannabis oils, teas and an extract with
approximately equal quantities of Δ9-THC and CBD. These substances can be
administered through various routes including orally and by smoke inhalation.
      Evidence on the dependence potential of extracts and tinctures of
cannabis varies by substance. There are no published studies that have evaluated
the dependence potential of mixtures of Δ9-THC and CBD, but there is limited
evidence of a withdrawal syndrome upon abrupt cessation (for example, sleep
disruption and mood changes). Frequent use of the BHO extract has been
associated with physical dependence. The psychoactive constituent, Δ9-THC,
present in most extracts has been separately studied and has been shown to have
dependence potential.
      Few published studies have evaluated the abuse potential of cannabis
extracts in animals or humans. There are, however, studies that have investigated
the abuse potential of various components of extracts and tinctures of cannabis.
While particular components, such as Δ9-THC, have demonstrated abuse
potential, other components in these preparations, such as CBD, have not.
       The Committee recognized that the term “extracts and tinctures” as cited
in the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs encompasses preparations
that have psychoactive properties as well as those that do not. The Committee
also recognized that the psychoactive properties of these preparations are due
principally to Δ9-THC, which is currently scheduled in the 1971 Convention on
Psychotropic Substances. Among the substances that are not psychoactive in the
preparations that are derived as extracts or tinctures of cannabis are some that
have promising therapeutic indications, such as CBD.
       Cannabis extracts and tinctures are placed in Schedule I of the 1961 Single
Convention on Narcotic Drugs. The Committee noted that the category “extract
and tinctures of cannabis” encompasses very diverse formulations with varying
ratios of cannabis components, in particular Δ9-THC, and with or without
psychoactive properties.
       The Committee therefore concluded that there is sufficient information
to recommend a critical review of extracts and tinctures of cannabis at a future
ECDD meeting to address the necessity of continuing to include the term “extracts
and tinctures of cannabis” in the 1961 Convention.

9.1.1 Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ9-THC; dronabinol)
Substance identification
Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ9-THC; dronabinol) refers to the following four
stereoisomers:
       a.   (−)-trans-Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (also known as dronabinol)
       b.   (+)-trans-Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol
       c.   (−)-cis-Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol
       d.   (+)-cis- Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol
The stereoisomer (−)-trans-Δ9-THC is the only one that occurs naturally in the
cannabis plant and is generally the only stereoisomer that has been studied.
Dronabinol is the International Nonproprietary Name (INN) for this isomer.
Where the term “Δ9-THC” is used in this report without further specification,
it refers to (−)-trans-Δ9-THC or dronabinol. If reference is made to a different
isomer, this is explicitly specified.

Chemistry
(−)-Trans-Δ9-THC does not occur at a significant concentration in cannabis
plants. The plant synthesizes primarily the carboxylic acid form of (−)-trans-Δ9-
THC, namely, Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinolic acid (THCA) from cannabigerolic acid
and this substance accumulates in the glandular trichomes of flowers and leaves.
THCA is thermally unstable and can be quickly decarboxylated to (−)-trans-
Δ9-THC when exposed to heat via smoking or baking; this conversion can also
occur spontaneously during storage. (−)-Trans-Δ9-THC can be extracted from
the plant after it has been heated; THCA can be extracted from the plant and
then converted to (−)-trans-Δ9-THC; or it can be synthesized from terpene and
olivetol.
       Synthetic methods for the other isomers have been reported.
       Several analytical methods are available for the measurement of (−)-trans-
Δ9-THC in different matrices such as cannabis plant, cannabis extracts and
biological fluids. These are mostly chromatographic methods coupled to detection
techniques such as ultraviolet and mass spectrometry.

Ease of convertibility into controlled substances
The only controlled substance that (−)-trans-Δ9-THC can be converted into is its
isomer (−)-trans- Δ8-THC, which is in Schedule I of the 1971 Convention.

General pharmacology
Δ -THC is highly lipophilic and animal studies have found that it is readily
absorbed and distributed to the brain and other organs following various
routes of administration. These include the intraperitoneal, oral, intramuscular,
intravenous and inhalation routes. In humans, the predominant route of
administration of pure Δ9-THC is oral. The stereochemical variants of Δ9-THC
are not routinely administered.
       Compared to absorption of Δ9-THC in smoked cannabis, maximal
plasma levels after oral administration are lower, typically resulting in flatter
concentration–time curves. Peak plasma levels usually occur 60–120 minutes after
ingestion although delays of up to 4–6 hours have also been reported. Estimated
bioavailability averages 6%, with considerable variability among individuals.
Ingestion is accompanied by significant first-pass metabolism in the liver, further
decreasing the amount of Δ9-THC that reaches sites of action. Δ9-THC is strongly
bound to plasma proteins and is readily distributed to highly vascularized tissues
(for example, the liver, heart and lungs) after absorption.
       Metabolism of orally administered Δ9-THC occurs primarily in the liver
and is extensive, with almost 100 metabolites having been identified. 11-hydroxy-
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (11-OH-Δ9-THC) is an active metabolite. Owing to
its extensive metabolism, relatively little Δ9-THC is eliminated from the body
unchanged. Δ9-THC is excreted primarily in the faeces (65–80%) and in the urine
(20–35%).
       When administered to animals, Δ9-THC produces a characteristic profile
of pharmacological effects. These include:
         ■■ a tetrad of effects – locomotor suppression, antinociception, hypo-
            thermia and catalepsy – in mice and rats;
         ■■ discriminative stimulus effects in rats, mice, pigeons and rhesus
            monkeys;
         ■■ reinforcing effects in squirrel monkeys; and
         ■■ static ataxia in dogs.
      These cannabimimetic effects are produced through interaction with an
endogenous cannabinoid system that includes two cannabinoid receptors, CB1
and CB2. CB1 receptors are widespread and abundant in the brain and periphery,
CB2 receptors are confined primarily to the periphery. The psychoactive effects of
Δ9-THC are mediated via activation of CB1 receptors in the brain.
      The limited information on the pharmacology of the stereochemical
variants of (–)-trans-Δ9-THC suggests that they have little activity. (–)-Trans-Δ9-
THC was at least tenfold more potent in the dog static ataxia model than (+)-cis-
Δ9-THC or (+)-trans-Δ9-THC, neither of which produced the full syndrome of
cannabinoid effects at the highest dose administered. In addition, (–)-trans-Δ9-
THC exhibited a tenfold greater hypothermic effect in mice and was 100-fold
more potent at decreasing schedule-controlled responding in rhesus monkeys
than (+)-Δ9-THC.

Toxicology
Δ -THC has very low potential to produce lethal effects. Following oral
administration, the median lethal dose (LD50) is 800 mg/kg in rats, up to
3000 mg/kg in dogs and up to 9000 mg/kg in monkeys. It has been calculated
that a lethal dose for a 70-kg human would be approximately 4 g and that such
a dose would not typically be achieved in a human following oral consumption,
smoking or vaporizing the substance.
       Acute Δ9-THC exposure in humans produces tachycardia with an average
increase in heart rate of eight beats per minute. Tolerance may occur to these
effects, and decreases in blood pressure and heart rate may occur with subsequent
exposures. Δ9-THC is a bronchodilator. In vitro and in vivo animal studies
demonstrate that high doses of Δ9-THC can modulate the immune system in
complex ways. In two human studies using low-dose Δ9-THC no significant
effects on the immune system were observed.
       According to a comprehensive assessment by the US National Toxicology
Program, Δ9-THC does not have mutagenic or carcinogenic effects. Oral
administration of Δ9-THC to rats for 77 days reduced the size of the seminal
vesicles, seminal fluid volume, spermatogenesis and the number of Leydig cells
in the testis. However, sperm count, mating success and testosterone levels were
not affected. No data are available on teratogenicity in humans. In animal studies,
administration of Δ9-THC during gestation promotes a slight decrease in fetal
weight. It crosses the placental barrier and is secreted in the mother’s milk.
       In a randomized controlled trial with 329 multiple sclerosis patients,
following daily administration of Δ9-THC at doses of up to 28 mg/day for three
years, low to moderate toxicity and a low incidence of other adverse effects were
reported. There were no differences in the median number of adverse events
between the placebo and Δ9-THC-treated groups. Δ9-THC-treated patients
experienced more dizziness and light-headedness as well as dissociative thinking
and perception disorders.

Adverse reactions in humans
In humans, Δ9-THC has very similar pharmacological and subjective effects to
those of cannabis. Users may exhibit euphoria, laughter and increased loquacity.
Δ9-THC increases appetite, promotes dry mouth and occasional dizziness, and
produces apparent enhancement of visual, olfactory and auditory perceptions.
Exposure to Δ9-THC may also cause nausea and vomiting in some users.
Following repeated exposure, users generally develop tolerance to the effects of
Δ9 THC. Δ9-THC exposure can cause subtle cognitive deficits such as impairment
of attention and short-term memory. Higher doses of Δ9-THC are associated
with anxiety, panic, confusion and disorientation in some users. Δ9-THC can
also provoke transient psychosis-like psychological phenomena in some healthy
participants.
       Oral Δ9-THC is reported to cause impairment of driving skills in both
driving simulators and on roads. Doses of 10 and 20 mg of Δ9-THC increased
standard deviation of lateral position – indicative of loss of road tracking control
– and time taken to adapt speed – indicative of increased reaction times.

Dependence potential
Rapid and profound tolerance develops to numerous acute effects of Δ9-THC
following chronic administration to animals. Chronic administration of Δ9-
THC can induce physical dependence in laboratory animals as evidenced by
withdrawal effects that can emerge spontaneously or be precipitated by the
cannabinoid receptor antagonist, rimonabant.
       Two studies in humans have demonstrated the development of tolerance
to the self-reported effects of Δ9-THC. These studies also reported withdrawal
effects indicative of physical dependence. The symptoms of withdrawal that were
observed included hyperactivity, increased salivation, irritability, marked changes
in sleep patterns and restlessness. In one study, sleep disruption was found to
persist for up to seven nights. Most withdrawal symptoms were alleviated within
96 hours or immediately if participants re-administered Δ9-THC.

Abuse potential
One laboratory reported the successful intravenous self-administration
of Δ9-THC in squirrel monkeys, the rates of which were attenuated by the
administration of rimonabant. Several other laboratories have failed to establish
the self-administration of Δ9-THC in animals.
       Δ9-THC has clear discriminative effects in several species, including
rats, rhesus monkeys, mice and pigeons. Δ9-THC-like discriminative effects
are produced by other cannabinoids or cannabis preparations that have been
reported to be cannabis-like in humans, including Δ8-THC, cannabinol, hashish,
CP55,940, WIN55,212-2, and an array of abused synthetic cannabinoids (for
example, JWH-018, XLR-11, UR-144, AB-CHMINACA). CBD, however, does
not produce such effects.
       Oral administration of Δ9-THC produces subjective effects that resemble
those of cannabis. Humans readily distinguish the effects of oral Δ9-THC as being
cannabis-like and as different from alcohol or d-amphetamine. Furthermore,
when orally administered or smoked Δ9-THC is compared directly to cannabis
administered via the same route, both Δ9-THC and cannabis produce a similar
profile of subjective effects including increased feelings of “drug effect”, experience
of a “drug high” and increased ratings of cannabis-like effects.
       In controlled laboratory settings, oral self-administration of Δ9-THC has
been demonstrated; however, results suggest that it is a weak reinforcer at best. A
multi-method review revealed little evidence that oral Δ9-THC is used for non-
medical purposes.

Therapeutic applications and extent of therapeutic use and
        epidemiology of medical use
Δ9-THC or dronabinol has approval in a number of countries for indications
including anorexia associated with weight loss in patients with acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and for nausea and vomiting associated
with cancer chemotherapy in patients who do not gain adequate relief from
conventional antiemetic treatment.
       Δ9-THC has been explored for other indications. For example, it has
demonstrated at least partial effectiveness in decreasing neuropathic pain,
reducing anxiety in patients with chronic pain, increasing weight gain in
patients with anorexia nervosa, decreasing pain intensity and increasing patient
satisfaction when given as an adjunct to opioids for chronic pain, reducing
spasticity in patients with multiple sclerosis, and for improving tics (or a trend
towards such improvement) in patients with Tourette syndrome.

Listing on the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines
Δ9-THC (dronabinol) is not listed on the WHO EML (20th list) or the WHO
Model List of Essential Medicines for Children (6th list).

Marketing authorizations (as a medicinal product)
Dronabinol (Marinol®) is supplied as round, soft gelatine capsules for oral use
(AbbVie, Inc.), and Syndros is supplied as an oral solution (INSYS Therapeutics,
Inc.).

Industrial use
Δ9-THC has no legitimate industrial uses.

Non-medical use, abuse and dependence
Δ9-THC does not appear to be abused. A multi-method review revealed
little evidence that its oral formulation was used for non-medical purposes.
Phenomena such as “doctor-shopping” or “script-chasing” (i.e. obtaining multiple
prescriptions from multiple doctors for the same substance) are not common.

Nature and magnitude of public health problems related to
     misuse, abuse and dependence
Δ9-THC does not appear to have caused a public health problem related to misuse,
abuse or dependence. See section 9.13.

Licit production, consumption and international trade
Licit production and trade occur with the medicinal products mentioned in 9.11
(Marketing authorizations).

Illicit manufacture and traffic and related information
There are no data on the illicit manufacture of pure Δ9-THC.

Current international controls and their impact
Dronabinol, the INN of (−)-trans-Δ9-THC, and its stereochemical variants are
included in Schedule II of the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971.

Current and past national controls
Dronabinol is presumed to be controlled in all WHO Member States, except
Uruguay where the production, sale and use of cannabis for medical or non-
medical purposes was legalized in 2016.

WHO review history
Δ9-Tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ9-THC) and its stereochemical variants, with one
variant being dronabinol ((−)-trans-Δ9-THC), are currently listed in Schedule
II of the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances. Δ9-THC was originally
included in Schedule I of the 1971 Convention at the time of its adoption, together
with its stereochemical variants.
         ■■ In 1989, the WHO ECDD recommended, based on the critical review
            of dronabinol ((−)-trans-Δ9-THC) undertaken at its twenty-sixth
            meeting in 1988, that dronabinol be moved to Schedule II while
            keeping the other isomers and stereochemical variants in Schedule I.
   WHO’s proposal to transfer dronabinol to Schedule II was rejected by
   the CND at its eleventh special session in 1990.
■■ At its twenty-seventh meeting in 1990, the ECDD carried out a critical
   review of updated information on Δ9-THC. It recommended that
   Δ9-THC and stereochemical variants be rescheduled from Schedule
   I to Schedule II of the 1971 Convention. This was done to avoid a
   distinction between Δ9-THC and its stereochemical variants leading
   to their placement under different schedules and to prevent potential
   legal and forensic analytical problems. This recommendation was
   adopted by the CND at its thirty-fourth session in 1991.
■■ At the thirty-third ECDD meeting in 2002, Δ9-THC was again
   critically reviewed. The Committee recommended that dronabinol
   and its stereochemical variants be rescheduled from Schedule II to
   Schedule IV of the 1971 Convention. However, no further procedural
   steps were taken, i.e. there was no formal communication of this
   recommendation from WHO to the CND.
■■ At its thirty-fourth meeting in 2006, the ECDD carried out an
   assessment of an updated critical review report on dronabinol.
   The Committee concluded that although dronabinol constitutes
   a substantial risk to public health, this risk is different from those
   related to cannabis – controlled under the 1961 Convention. The
   substance was found to have moderate therapeutic usefulness, with
   a likelihood of an increase in its medical use in light of continuing
   clinical research. Therefore, the Committee recommended that
   dronabinol and its stereochemical variants be rescheduled from
   Schedule II to Schedule III of the 1971 Convention.
■■ In March 2007, at its fiftieth session, the CND decided by consensus
   not to vote on the recommendation of the WHO ECDD to transfer
   dronabinol and its stereochemical variants from Schedule II to
   Schedule III of the 1971 Convention. Furthermore, the CND requested
   WHO, in consultation with the INCB, as appropriate, to undertake,
   for consideration by the Commission, a review of dronabinol and
   its stereochemical variants when additional information became
   available (CND Decision 50/2).
■■ At its thirty-fifth meeting in 2012, the ECDD discussed the CND’s
   recommendations of 2007. The Committee did not carry out a
   review of dronabinol, but reinstated the recommendation made at
   the thirty-fourth meeting of the ECDD to move dronabinol and
   its stereochemical variants from Schedule II to Schedule III of the
   1971 Convention. The Committee decided that the previous ECDD
   decision on dronabinol and its stereochemical variants should stand,
   since it was unaware of any new evidence that was likely to materially
   alter the scheduling recommendation made at its thirty-fourth
   meeting. This recommendation was communicated by the Director-
   General of WHO to the Secretary-General in October 2012.
■■ The CND reconsidered this issue in March 2013 at its fifty-sixth
   session. Concern was expressed by several delegations that, despite
   the recommendation received from WHO, no decision had yet
   been taken by the Commission to reschedule dronabinol and its
   stereochemical variants. A number of delegations noted that they
   were not able to support the recommendation made by WHO
   regarding dronabinol, as that recommendation could hinder efforts
   to prevent international cannabis abuse and could send a confusing
   message regarding the harm associated with the use of cannabis. It
   was suggested that WHO should continue to review dronabinol.
■■ In March 2014, based on the recommendation made by the ECDD
   at its thirty-fifth meeting in 2012, the CND voted against moving
   dronabinol and its stereochemical variants from Schedule II to
   Schedule III of the 1971 Convention.
■■ At its thirty-eighth meeting in 2016 the ECDD requested that
   Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ9-THC) be pre-reviewed along with
   cannabis and cannabis resin, extracts and tinctures of cannabis,
   cannabidiol (CBD) and isomers of THC.
■■ At its fortieth meeting in June 2018, the ECDD evaluated the
   above-mentioned pre-reviews and recommended to proceed to the
   critical reviews of cannabis and cannabis resin, extracts and tinctures
   of cannabis, Δ9-THC and isomers of THC at the forty-first meeting
   in November 2018.

Recommendation
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ9-THC ) refers to four stereoisomers of Δ9-THC. One
of these stereoisomers is found in the cannabis plant and is also known by the
INN dronabinol; it has recognized therapeutic uses.
        Chronic administration of Δ9-THC can induce physical dependence in
laboratory animals and in humans. This has been demonstrated by the presence
of withdrawal effects in animals and human subjects. The subjective effects of
Δ9-THC when administered orally resemble those of cannabis. However, there is
little evidence that oral Δ9-THC is used for non-medical purposes so as to cause
a public health problem.
       Δ9-THC (dronabinol) has approval in a number of countries for therapeutic
indications including anorexia associated with weight loss in patients with AIDS
and for nausea and vomiting associated with cancer chemotherapy. Δ9-THC
(dronabinol) is routinely administered orally.
       Δ9-THC and its stereoisomers are listed in Schedule II of the Convention
on Psychotropic Substances of 1971. In previous ECDD reviews, Δ9-THC, and
especially dronabinol, had been considered in a synthetic form as a pharmaceutical
preparation.
       However, the Committee recognized that Δ9-THC, in particular, its
active and naturally occurring stereoisomer, dronabinol, today also refers to the
main psychoactive component of cannabis and cannabis-derived psychoactive
products. In this form, dronabinol produces similar ill-effects, dependence and
abuse potential to cannabis, which is placed under the 1961 Single Convention.
A substance liable to similar abuse and productive of similar ill-effects to those
of a substance already scheduled within the 1961 Convention would normally be
scheduled in the same way as that substance.
       The Committee concluded that there is sufficient information to
recommend a critical review of Δ9-THC at a future ECDD meeting in order to
address the appropriateness of its placement within the Conventions.

10.1.1 Tetrahydrocannabinol (Isomers of THC)
Substance identification
The isomers of THC include six molecules that are identified in Schedule I of the
Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971 including their stereochemical
variants.

Chemistry
Methods have been developed for synthesis of these isomers.

Ease of convertibility into controlled substances
It is possible to convert (−)-trans-Δ8-THC into (−)-trans-Δ9-THC in laboratory
facilities.

General pharmacology
Δ8-THC and Δ9(11)-THC each produce Δ9-THC-like pharmacological effects in
some animal models, whereas Δ10-THC does not. In humans, Δ8-THC is active
when administered via several different routes, for example, oral, intravenous
and inhalation. One stereoisomer of Δ6a,10a-THC ((S)-(−)- Δ6a,10a-THC) has
psychoactive effects in humans similar to those of Δ9-THC but is quantitatively
less potent (1:3 to 1:6), while the (R)-(+)-Δ6a,10a-THC, a second stereoisomer was
inactive. Δ6a(10a)-THC also produces Δ9-THC-like effects when smoked, but the
effects are less marked and have a shorter duration than those of Δ9 THC. None
of the other isomers have been tested in humans.

Toxicology
Very little information exists on the toxicology of these isomers. There are limited
preclinical toxicity data, and the isomers have not been administered to humans
for extended periods. Limited toxicology data are available only for Δ8-THC,
Δ6a,10a-THC and Δ9 (11)-THC.
        The oral median lethal dose (LD50) of Δ8-THC in rats is 2000 mg/kg.
Subcutaneous administration of Δ8-THC (up to 40 mg/kg) in rats prior to
conception or during gestation did not have teratogenic effects. From the limited
data available, Δ8-THC does not appear to be mutagenic.
        In mice, intravenous administration of 200 mg/kg Δ6a,10a-THC did not
promote mortality. Δ6a,10a-THC does not reduce locomotor activity in mice.
        When administered to humans via smoking, Δ6a,10a-THC has much
lower psychoactivity than Δ9-THC. The effects of smoking 15 mg Δ6a,10a-THC
are less marked and have a shorter duration than a 12-mg dose of Δ9-THC.
Δ6a,10a THC produced symptoms of light-headedness, numbness and tingling
in the extremities and face, fatigue, cold perspiration, drowsiness and a feeling
of relaxation. Impairment of thinking and the perception of time were less
pronounced than with Δ9-THC.
        Δ9 (11)-THC has an intravenous LD50 of 93 mg/kg in mice, which is double
that found for Δ9-THC.

Adverse reactions in humans
Only Δ8-THC and Δ6a,10a-THC have been tested in humans. The acute
intoxicating effects of these molecules are similar in quality but less potent than
acute doses of Δ9-THC. These molecules are not available for medical or non-
medical purposes, so little is known about their adverse effects in humans.

Dependence potential
No reports are available of studies that have assessed the potential of THC isomers
for inducing physical dependence in laboratory animals or humans

Abuse potential
Data on the specific abuse potential of the six isomers are sparse. Of the six THC
isomers reviewed here, preclinical assessment of abuse liability of three isomers
has been evaluated for their pharmacological similarity to Δ9-THC, particularly
in discrimination tests for substitution of the Δ9-THC discriminative stimulus.
Δ9(11)-THC demonstrated the cannabimimetic tetrad of characteristic Δ9-THC-like
effects, including suppression of locomotor activity, hypothermia, antinociception
and ring immobility in animal studies, and was found to be several-fold less potent
than Δ9-THC for each dependent measure. It has also been shown to produce
Δ9-THC-like discriminative effects but at lower potency than Δ9-THC.                     43
       Δ8-THC also produces Δ9-THC-like discriminative effects but at lower
potency, and induces the characteristic tetrad of Δ9-THC-like effects as described
in the paragraph above.
       Δ10-THC, the third isomer that has been tested, did not produce Δ9-THC-
like discriminative effects.
       Few studies addressing the abuse potential of THC isomers have been
undertaken in humans. The information on abuse potential of THC isomers
is based primarily on early observational studies in which their subjective or
physiological effects in human volunteers were compared to those reported
following Δ9-THC administration. Of the six THC isomers reviewed here, only
Δ8-THC and Δ6a,10a-THC have been tested in humans. The acute intoxicating
effects of these substances are similar to those of Δ9-THC, but they are less potent.

Therapeutic applications, extent of therapeutic use and
     epidemiology of medical use
No medical or veterinarian use of these isomers has been reported.

Listing in the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines
None of the isomers is listed in the WHO EML (20th list) or the WHO Model List
of Essential Medicines for Children (6th list).

Marketing authorizations (as a medicinal product)
There are no known marketing authorizations for these isomers.

Industrial use
These isomers have no known legitimate industrial use.

Non-medical use, abuse and dependence
No case reports of abuse or dependence relating to the use of these isomers were
available. Between 1995 and 2014, one study reported a change in the potency of
seized cannabis products in the USA. The data showed that before 2009, Δ8-THC
had not been detected in cannabis seizures in the USA. A gradual increase in Δ8-
THC content was observed from 0.01% to 0.07% in 2014. However, compared to
Δ9-THC, Δ8-THC content was lower by a factor of 10, and increasing potency of
Δ8-THC did not appear to impact Δ9-THC concentrations.

Nature and magnitude of public health problems related to
      misuse, abuse and dependence
These isomers appear not to have been available for use. At present no public health
problems (for example, driving under the influence of drugs or comorbidities)
have been associated with their use.

Licit production, consumption and international trade
There is no known licit production of these isomers.

Illicit manufacture and traffic and related information
There appears to be no illicit manufacture or traffic of these isomers.

Current international controls and their impact
These isomers are included in Schedule I of the Convention on Psychotropic
Substances of 1971.

Current and past national controls
The extent to which the isomers of THC, other than Δ9-THC, are controlled
depends on the exact wording of the legislation in each jurisdiction.

WHO review history
The isomers of Δ9-THC have never been subject to a critical review or pre-review
by the ECDD.

Recommendation
There are currently six isomers of THC listed in Schedule I of the 1971 Convention.
Of the six THC isomers reviewed here, the abuse potential of only two, Δ8-THC
and Δ6a,10a-THC, have been evaluated in a few human studies. These studies found
that the acute intoxicating effects of these substances are similar to those of Δ9-
THC, but they are less potent.
        There are no reports that THC isomers induce physical dependence. There
are no reported medical or veterinary uses of these isomers.
        There is no evidence that any of these listed isomers are being abused or are
likely to be abused so as to constitute a public health or social problem. However,
the Committee noted the potential difficulty of differentiating these six isomers
(listed in Schedule 1 of the 1971 Convention) from Δ9-THC (listed in Schedule II
of the 1971 Convention) using standard methods of chemical analysis owing to
their chemical similarities. The Committee further noted that this is an important
factor to consider in the scheduling of these isomers.
       The Committee concluded that there is sufficient information to
recommend a critical review of the isomers of THC at a future ECDD meeting
and to explore further the relevance of their current scheduling within the 1971
Convention.
