
9.3 Fentanyl analogues
9.3.1    Para-fluoro-butyrylfentanyl
Substance identification
Para-fluoro-butyrylfentanyl (N-(4-fluorophenyl)-N-[1-(2-phenylethyl)piperidin-
4-yl]butanamide) is a synthetic analogue of the opioid analgesic fentanyl.
Samples obtained from seizures and from other sources suggest that para-fluoro-
butyrylfentanyl is available in the form of a powder, tablet, nasal spray and a
preparation for vaping.

WHO review history
Para-fluoro-butyrylfentanyl has not been previously pre-reviewed or critically
reviewed by the WHO ECDD. A direct critical review was proposed based on
information brought to WHO’s attention that para-fluoro-butyrylfentanyl poses
a serious risk to public health and has no recognized therapeutic use.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Para-fluoro-butyrylfentanyl has a higher affinity to μ-opioid receptors than
to κ- and δ-opioid receptors and has been shown to act as a partial agonist at
the μ-opioid receptor. In animals, it produces typical opioid effects, including
analgesia, with a potency between that of morphine and fentanyl. In cases of non-
fatal intoxication in humans, para-fluoro-butyrylfentanyl has produced signs and
symptoms such as disorientation, slurred speech, unsteady gait, hypotension and
pupil constriction that are consistent with an opioid mechanism of action.
        Para-fluoro-butyrylfentanyl can be readily converted to its isomer para-
fluoro-isobutyrylfentanyl (N-(4-fluorophenyl)-2-methyl-N-[1-(2-phenylethyl)
piperidin-4-yl]propanamide), which is an opioid listed in Schedule I of the 1961
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs.

Dependence potential
There are no studies of the dependence potential of this substance in humans
or laboratory animals. However, based on its mechanism of action, para-fluoro-
butyrylfentanyl would be expected to produce dependence similar to other
opioid drugs.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
No controlled studies of the abuse potential of para-fluoro-butyrylfentanyl have
been reported and there is very little information on the extent of its abuse. The
substance has been detected in biological samples obtained in cases of fatal and
non-fatal intoxication. Fatalities have been reported in some countries where
the compound has been identified in biological fluids in combination with other
drugs. There have also been cases where death has been attributed to the effects
of para-fluoro-butyrylfentanyl.

Therapeutic usefulness
Para-fluoro-butyrylfentanyl is not known to have any therapeutic uses.

Recommendation
Para-fluoro-butyrylfentanyl is an opioid receptor agonist that has significant
potential for dependence and likelihood of abuse. The limited evidence available
indicates that it has adverse effects typical of opioids, which include the potential
to cause death due to respiratory depression. Para-fluoro-butyrylfentanyl has
caused substantial harm and has no therapeutic use. It is liable to similar abuse
and produces similar ill-effects to those of many other opioids placed in Schedule
I of the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs:
         ■■ Recommendation: The Committee recommended that para-
fluoro-butyrylfentanyl  (N-(4-fluorophenyl)-N-[1-(2-phenylethyl)
piperidin-4-yl]butanamide) be added to Schedule I of the 1961 Single
Convention on Narcotic Drugs.

9.3.2      Para-methoxy-butyrylfentanyl
Substance identification
Para-methoxy-butyrylfentanyl      (N-(4-methoxyphenyl)-N-[1-(2-phenylethyl)
piperidin-4-yl]butanamide) is a synthetic analogue of the opioid analgesic
fentanyl. Samples obtained from seizures and from other sources suggest that
para-methoxy-butyrylfentanyl is available in the form of a powder, tablet and a
nasal spray.

WHO review history
Para-methoxy-butyrylfentanyl has not been previously pre-reviewed or
critically reviewed by the WHO ECDD. A critical review was proposed based
on information brought to WHO’s attention that para-methoxy-butyrylfentanyl
poses serious risk to public health and has no recognized therapeutic use.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Para-methoxy-butyrylfentanyl has a higher affinity to μ-opioid receptors than
to κ- and δ-opioid receptors and has been shown to act as a partial agonist at
the μ-opioid receptor. In animals, it produces typical opioid effects including
analgesia and, in some animal studies, it had a potency higher than that of
morphine and close to that of fentanyl.
       Reported clinical features of intoxication involving para-methoxy-
butyrylfentanyl included the typical opioid effects of reduced level of consciousness,
respiratory depression and pupil constriction. In some cases, treatment with the
opioid antagonist naloxone was shown to reverse the drug-induced respiratory
depression. While this is consistent with an opioid mechanism of action, it should
be noted that in all such cases at least one other opioid was present.

Dependence potential
No studies of the dependence potential of this substance in humans or laboratory
animals have been reported. However, based on its mechanism of action, para-
methoxy-butyrylfentanyl would be expected to produce dependence similar to
other opioid drugs.

Abuse potential and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
No controlled studies of the abuse potential of para-methoxy-butyrylfentanyl have
been reported and very little information is available on the extent of its abuse.
Para-methoxy-butyrylfentanyl has been detected in biological samples obtained
from a limited number of cases of acute intoxication. Reported clinical features
are consistent with opioid effects, including respiratory depression. However, in
all of the documented cases of severe adverse events associated with use of para-
methoxy-butyrylfentanyl, other fentanyl analogues were also detected and the
role of para-methoxy-butyrylfentanyl is therefore not clear.

Therapeutic usefulness
Para-methoxy-butyrylfentanyl is not known to have any therapeutic uses.

Recommendation
The limited information available indicates that para-methoxy-butyrylfentanyl
is an analogue of the opioid analgesic fentanyl. There is evidence of its use in
a limited number of countries, with few reports of intoxication and no reports
of death. In the cases of intoxication, the role of para-methoxy-butyrylfentanyl
was not clear owing to the presence of other opioids. It has no therapeutic use.
Currently, there is little evidence that para-methoxy-butyrylfentanyl in causing
substantial harm that would warrant its placement under international control.
        ■■ Recommendation: The Committee recommended that para-meth-
oxy-butyrylfentanyl (N-(4-methoxyphenyl)-N-[1-(2-phenylethyl)
piperidin-4-yl]butanamide) be kept under surveillance by the WHO
Secretariat.

9.3.3      Ortho-fluorofentanyl
Substance identification
Ortho-fluorofentanyl (N-(2-fluorophenyl)-N-[1-(2-phenylethyl)piperidin-4-yl]
propanamide) is a synthetic analogue of the opioid analgesic fentanyl. It has two
positional isomers (para-fluorofentanyl and meta-fluorofentanyl).

WHO review history
Ortho-fluorofentanyl has not been previously pre-reviewed or critically reviewed
by the WHO ECDD. A direct critical review was proposed based on information
brought to WHO’s attention that ortho-fluorofentanyl poses a serious risk to
public health and has no recognized therapeutic use.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Receptor binding data show that ortho-fluorofentanyl has a higher affinity to
μ-opioid receptors than to κ- and δ-opioid receptors. No animal or human studies
have been published in the scientific literature. However, the clinical features
present in non-fatal cases of intoxication include characteristic opioid effects
such as loss of consciousness, pupil constriction and respiratory depression. The
effects of ortho-fluorofentanyl can be reversed by the administration of the opioid
antagonist naloxone, further confirming its opioid agonist mechanism of action.

Dependence potential
No studies of the dependence potential of ortho-fluorofentanyl in humans or
laboratory animals have been reported. However, based on its mechanism of
action, it would be expected to produce dependence similar to other opioid drugs.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
No animal or human studies are available to assess the abuse liability of ortho-
fluorofentanyl. There is evidence of its use from several countries, including
seizures in Europe and the United States. A number of confirmed fatalities
have been reported associated with this substance (one in Europe and 16 in
the United States since 2016). As a consequence of ortho-fluorofentanyl cross-
reacting with standard fentanyl immunoassays, it is possible that deaths due to
ortho-fluorofentanyl have been attributed to fentanyl and hence the number of
recorded deaths due to ortho-fluorofentanyl may be an underestimate. Several
countries in different parts of the world have placed ortho-fluorofentanyl under
national control.

Therapeutic usefulness
Ortho-fluorofentanyl is not known to have any therapeutic use.

Recommendation
Ortho-fluorofentanyl is an opioid receptor agonist that has the potential for
dependence and is subject to abuse. The limited evidence available indicates that
it produces typical opioid adverse effects that include the potential to cause death
due to respiratory depression. Ortho-fluorofentanyl has caused substantial harm
and has no therapeutic use. It is liable to similar abuse and produces similar ill-
effects to those of many other opioids placed in Schedule I of the 1961 Single
Convention on Narcotic Drugs:
        ■■ Recommendation: The Committee recommended that ortho-
fluorofentanyl (N-(2-fluorophenyl)-N-[1-(2-phenylethyl)piperidin-
4-yl]propanamide) be added to Schedule I of the 1961 Single
Convention on Narcotic Drugs.

9.3.4     Methoxyacetylfentanyl
Substance identification
Methoxyacetylfentanyl (2-methoxy-N-phenyl-N-[1-(2-phenylethyl)piperidin-4-
yl]acetamide) is a synthetic analogue of the opioid fentanyl. Samples obtained
from seizures and from other sources suggest that methoxyacetylfentanyl is
available in the form of powders, liquids and tablets.

WHO review history
Methoxyacetylfentanyl has not been previously pre-reviewed or critically reviewed
by the WHO ECDD. A critical review was proposed based on information
brought to WHO’s attention that methoxyacetylfentanyl poses a serious risk to
public health and has no recognized therapeutic use.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Methoxyacetylfentanyl has a higher affinity to μ-opioid receptors than to κ-
and δ-opioid receptors and has been shown to act as an agonist at the μ-opioid
receptor. In animals, it produces analgesia with a potency higher than that of
morphine and close to that of fentanyl. The analgesia was blocked by the opioid
antagonist naltrexone, confirming its opioid mechanism of action.
       The most serious acute health risk is respiratory depression, which in the
case of an overdose can lead to respiratory arrest and death. This is consistent
with its opioid mechanism of action.

Dependence potential
There are no studies of the dependence potential of this substance in
humans or laboratory animals. However, based on its mechanism of action,
methoxyacetylfentanyl would be expected to produce dependence similar to
other opioid drugs.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
In the animal drug discrimination model of subjective drug effects,
methoxyacetylfentanyl produced effects similar to those of morphine. It also
decreased activity levels and both the discriminative and rate-decreasing effects
were blocked by the opioid antagonist naltrexone. Based on its receptor action and
these effects in animal models, it would be expected that methoxyacetylfentanyl
would be subject to abuse in a manner comparable to that of other opioids.
       There is evidence that methoxyacetylfentanyl has been administered by
injection and by nasal insufflation of powder. A large number of seizures of
this substance have been reported in Europe and the United States. A number
of deaths have been reported in Europe and the United States following which
methoxyacetylfentanyl was detected in postmortem samples. While other drugs
were also present in most of these cases, methoxyacetylfentanyl was deemed the
cause of death or a major contributor to death in a significant proportion of them.
Several countries have placed methoxyacetylfentanyl under national control.

Therapeutic usefulness
Methoxyacetylfentanyl is not known to have any therapeutic use.

Recommendation
The Committee considered that methoxyacetylfentanyl is a substance with high
abuse liability and dependence potential. It is an opioid agonist that is more
potent than morphine and its use has contributed to a large number of deaths
in different regions. It has no therapeutic use and it poses a significant risk to
public health. The Committee considered that the evidence of its abuse warrants
placement under international control.
         ■■ Recommendation:      The   Committee    recommended       that
methoxyacetylfentanyl (2-methoxy-N-phenyl-N-[1-(2-phenylethyl)
piperidin-4-yl] acetamide) be added to Schedule I of the Single
Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961.

9.3.5     Cyclopropylfentanyl
Substance identification
Cyclopropylfentanyl ((N-phenyl-N-1-(2-phenylethyl)-4-piperidyl) cyclopropan-
ecarboxamide) is a synthetic analogue of the opioid fentanyl. Samples obtained
from seizures and from other sources suggest that cyclopropylfentanyl is availa-
ble in the form of powders, liquids and tablets.

WHO review history
Cyclopropylfentanyl has not been previously pre-reviewed or critically reviewed
by the WHO ECDD. A critical review was proposed based on information brought
to WHO’s attention that cyclopropylfentanyl poses a serious risk to public health
and has no recognized therapeutic use.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Cyclopropylfentanyl has a higher affinity to the μ-opioid receptor than to the δ-
and κ-opioid receptors. There is no further information on the actions and effects
of cyclopropylfentanyl from controlled studies. Based on its role in numerous
deaths (see below), it is reasonable to assume that cyclopropylfentanyl acts as a
μ-opioid receptor agonist similar to morphine and fentanyl.

Dependence potential
No preclinical or clinical studies have been published in the scientific literature
concerning dependence on cyclopropylfentanyl. However, based on its mechanism
of action, cyclopropylfentanyl would be expected to produce dependence similar
to other opioid drugs.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
Numerous seizures of cyclopropylfentanyl have been reported from different
regions. In some countries, this substance has been among the most common
fentanyl analogues detected in postmortem samples. In almost all of these cases,
cyclopropylfentanyl was determined to have either caused or contributed to
death, even in the presence of other substances.

Therapeutic usefulness
Cyclopropylfentanyl is not known to have any therapeutic use.

Recommendation
The available evidence indicates that cyclopropylfentanyl has opioid actions and
effects. It has been extensively trafficked and has been administered by several
different routes. Its use has been associated with a large number of documented
deaths, in most of which it was found to be the principal cause of death.
Cyclopropylfentanyl has no known therapeutic use and has been associated with
substantial harm.
         ■■ Recommendation: The Committee recommended that cyclopro-
pylfentanyl (N-phenyl-N-[1-(2-phenylethyl)piperidin-4-yl]cyclopro-
panecarboxamide) be added to Schedule I of the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs.

9.4 Synthetic cannabinoids
9.4.1     ADB-FUBINACA
Substance identification
ADB-FUBINACA              (N-[(2S)-1-amino-3,3-dimethyl-1-oxobutan-2-yl]-1-[(4-
fluorophenyl)methyl]-1H-indazole-3-carboxamide) is available as a powder, in
solution or is sprayed on plant material that mimics the appearance of cannabis.
It is sold as herbal incense or branded products under a variety of different names.

WHO review history
ADB-FUBINACA has not been previously pre-reviewed or critically reviewed by
the WHO ECDD. A critical review was proposed based on information brought
to WHO’s attention that ADB-FUBINACA poses a serious risk to public health
and has no recognized therapeutic use.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
ADB-FUBINACA is similar to other synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonists
that are currently scheduled under the Convention on Psychotropic Substances
of 1971. It binds to both the CB1 and CB2 cannabinoid receptors with full agonist
activity as demonstrated by in vitro studies. The efficacy and potency of ADB-
FUBINACA is substantially greater than that of Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ9-
THC). Reported clinical features of intoxication include confusion, agitation,
somnolence, hypertension and tachycardia, similar to intoxication with other
synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonists.

Dependence potential
No controlled experimental studies examining the dependence potential of
ADB-FUBINACA in humans or animals were available. However, based on its
central nervous system action as a full CB1 agonist, ADB-FUBINACA would be
expected to produce dependence in a manner similar to or more pronounced
than cannabis.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
ADB-FUBINACA is sold and used as a substitute for cannabis. It is smoked (as
preparations of drug components introduced onto plant material) or vaped (i.e.
using an e-cigarette). Owing to the nature of synthetic cannabinoid products,
users cannot tell which synthetic cannabinoid is contained in such products.
Evidence from case reports in which ADB-FUBINACA has been detected in
biological samples has demonstrated that use of this substance has contributed
to severe adverse reactions in humans, including death. However, in most cases
it was noted that other substances, including other synthetic cannabinoids, were
also present in the urine or blood samples taken following non-fatal and fatal
intoxication and/or in the product used. Evidence of use has been reported from
Asia, Europe and the United States. In recognition of its potential for abuse and
associated harm, ADB-FUBINACA has been placed under national control in a
number of countries in several different regions.

Therapeutic usefulness
ADB-FUBINACA is not known to have any therapeutic use.

Recommendation
ADB-FUBINACA is a synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonist that is
administered by smoking plant material sprayed with the substance or inhaling
vapour after heating. Its mode of action suggests the potential for dependence
and the likelihood of abuse. Its use has been associated with a range of severe
adverse effects, including death. These effects are similar to those produced
by other synthetic cannabinoids that have the same mechanism of action as
ADB-FUBINACA and which are placed in Schedule II of the Convention on
Psychotropic Substances of 1971. ADB-FUBINACA has no therapeutic use.
         ■■ Recommendation: The Committee recommended that ADB-FU-
BINACA (N-[(2S)-1-amino-3,3-dimethyl-1-oxobutan-2-yl]-1-[(4-
fluorophenyl)methyl]-1H-indazole-3-carboxamide) be added to
Schedule II of the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971.

9.4.2      FUB-AMB
Substance identification
FUB-AMB         (methyl      (2S)-2-({1-[(4-fluorophenyl)methyl]-1H-indazole-3-
carbonyl}amino)-3-methylbutanoate) is a synthetic cannabinoid that is also
referred to as MMB-FUBINACA and AMB-FUBINACA. FUB-AMB is available
as a powder, in solution or sprayed on plant material that mimics the appearance
of cannabis. It is sold as herbal incense or branded products under a variety of
different names.

WHO review history
FUB-AMB has not been previously pre-reviewed or critically reviewed by the
WHO ECDD. A critical review was proposed based on information brought to
WHO’s attention that FUB-AMB poses a serious risk to public health and has no
recognized therapeutic use.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
FUB-AMB is similar to other synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonists that are
currently scheduled under the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971.
It binds to both the CB1 and CB2 cannabinoid receptors with full agonist activity
as demonstrated by in vitro studies. The efficacy and potency of FUB-AMB is
substantially greater than that of Δ9-THC and it has effects similar to those of other
synthetic cannabinoids, including severe central nervous system depression.

Dependence potential
No reports of controlled experimental studies examining the dependence
potential of FUB-AMB in humans or animals were available. However, based
on its central nervous system action as a full CB1 agonist, FUB-AMB would be
expected to produce dependence in a manner similar to or more pronounced
than cannabis.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
Consistent with its CB1 cannabinoid receptor agonist activity, FUB-AMB
produces complete dose-dependent substitution for the discriminative stimulus
effects of Δ9-THC when administered to mice by various routes. This suggests
that it has abuse potential similar to that of Δ9-THC.
        Use of FUB-AMB has been reported from Europe, New Zealand and the
United States. It is smoked (as preparations of drug components introduced
onto plant material) or vaped (i.e. using an e-cigarette). Owing to the nature of
synthetic cannabinoid products, users cannot tell which synthetic cannabinoid is
contained in such products.
        FUB-AMB use was confirmed in case reports of a mass intoxication in
the United States. The predominant symptom was severe central nervous system
depression, resulting in markedly slowed behaviour and speech. It was reported
that in New Zealand, there were at least 20 deaths related to the use of FUB-AMB.
The amounts of FUB-AMB in confiscated products in New Zealand were found
to be 2 to 25 times greater than those reported in the incident in the United States.

Therapeutic usefulness
FUB-AMB is not known to have any therapeutic uses.

Recommendation
FUB-AMB is a synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonist that is administered by
smoking plant material sprayed with the substance or inhaling vapour after heating.
Its mode of action suggests the potential for dependence and the likelihood of
abuse. Its use has been associated with a range of severe adverse effects including
a number of deaths. Its mechanism of action and manner of use are similar to
those of other synthetic cannabinoids placed in Schedule II of the Convention on
Psychotropic Substances of 1971. FUB-AMB has no therapeutic use.
         ■■ Recommendation: The Committee recommended that FUB-AMB
(methyl   (2S)-2-({1-[(4-fluorophenyl)methyl]-1H-indazole-3-car-
bonyl}amino)-3-methylbutanoate) be added to Schedule II of the
Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971.

9.4.3      ADB-CHMINACA
Substance identification
ADB-CHMINACA                (N-[(2S)-1-amino-3,3-dimethyl-1-oxobutan-2-yl]-1-
(cyclohexylmethyl)indazole-3-carboxamide) is a synthetic cannabinoid that
is also referred to as MAB-CHMINACA. ADB-CHMINACA is available as a
powder, in solution or sprayed on plant material that mimics the appearance
of cannabis. It is sold as herbal incense or branded products with a variety of
different names.

WHO review history
ADB-CHMINACA has not been previously pre-reviewed or critically reviewed by
the WHO ECDD. A critical review was proposed based on information brought
to WHO’s attention that ADB-CHMINACA poses a serious risk to public health
and has no recognized therapeutic use

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
ADB-CHMINACA is similar to other synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonists
that are currently scheduled under the Convention on Psychotropic Substances
of 1971. It binds to both the CB1 and CB2 cannabinoid receptors with full agonist
activity as demonstrated by in vitro studies. The efficacy and potency of ADB-
CHMINACA is substantially greater than that of Δ9-THC and it is among the
most potent synthetic cannabinoids studied to date. It has a profile of central
nervous system-mediated effects similar to those of other synthetic cannabinoids.
In mice, ADB-CHMINACA causes decreased locomotor activity in a dose-
dependent fashion, with a rapid onset of action and long-lasting effects.
       Signs and symptoms of intoxication associated with the use of ADB-
CHMINACA have included tachycardia, unresponsiveness, agitation,
combativeness, seizures, hyperemesis, slurred speech, delirium and sudden
death. These are consistent with the effects of other synthetic cannabinoids.

Dependence potential
No controlled experimental studies examining the dependence potential of
ADB-CHMINACA in humans or animals were available. However, based on its
central nervous system action as a full CB1 agonist, ADB-CHMINACA would
be expected to produce dependence in a manner similar to or more pronounced
than cannabis.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
Consistent with its activity as a CB1 cannabinoid receptor agonist, ADB-
CHMINACA fully substituted for Δ9-THC in drug discrimination tests. This
suggests that it has abuse potential similar to that of Δ9-THC.
      Evidence of the use of ADB-CHMINACA has been reported from Europe,
Japan and the United States, including cases of driving under the influence. It is
smoked (as preparations of drug components introduced onto plant material) or
vaped (i.e. using an e-cigarette). Owing to the nature of synthetic cannabinoid
products, users cannot tell which synthetic cannabinoid may be contained within
such products.
      ADB-CHMINACA use was analytically confirmed in case reports of several
drug-induced clusters of severe illness and death in the United States. In Europe,
13 deaths associated with analytically confirmed use of ADB-CHMINACA were
reported between 2014 and 2016, and another death occurred in Japan.

Therapeutic usefulness
ADB-CHMINACA is not known to have any therapeutic use.

Recommendation
ADB-CHMINACA is a synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonist that is used by
smoking plant material sprayed with the substance or inhaling vapour after
heating. It has effects that are similar to those of other synthetic cannabinoid
receptor agonists placed in Schedule II of the Convention on Psychotropic
Substances of 1971. Its mode of action suggests the potential for dependence
and the likelihood of abuse. There is evidence that ADB-CHMINACA has been
associated with numerous cases of fatal and non-fatal intoxications in a number
of countries. The substance causes substantial harm and has no therapeutic use.
        ■■ Recommendation: The Committee recommended that ADB-
CHMINACA          (N-[(2S)-1-amino-3,3-dimethyl-1-oxobutan-2-yl]-
1-(cyclohexylmethyl)-1H-indazole-3-carboxamide) be added to
Schedule II of the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971.

9.4.4      CUMYL-4CN-BINACA
Substance identification
CUMYL-4CN-BINACA                 (1-(4-cyanobutyl)-N-(2-phenylpropan-2-yl)-1H-
indazole-3-carboxamide) is a synthetic cannabinoid. It is available as a powder, in
solution or sprayed on plant material that mimics the appearance of cannabis. It
is sold as herbal incense or branded products under a variety of different names.

WHO review history
CUMYL-4CN-BINACA has not been previously pre-reviewed or critically
reviewed by the WHO ECDD. A critical review was proposed based on
information brought to WHO’s attention that CUMYL-4CN-BINACA poses
serious risk to public health and has no recognized therapeutic use.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
CUMYL-4CN-BINACA is similar to other synthetic cannabinoid receptor
agonists that are currently scheduled under the Convention on Psychotropic
Substances of 1971. It binds to both the CB1 and CB2 cannabinoid receptors with
full agonist activity as demonstrated by in vitro studies. The efficacy and potency
of CUMYL-4CN-BINACA is substantially greater than that of Δ9-THC and it
shares a profile of central nervous system-mediated effects with other synthetic
cannabinoids. Data have shown that it produced hypothermia in mice in common
with other CB1 cannabinoid receptor agonists.

Dependence potential
No controlled experimental studies examining the dependence potential of
CUMYL-4CN-BINACA in humans or animals were available. However, based on
its central nervous system action as a full CB1 agonist, CUMYL-4CN-BINACA
would be expected to produce dependence in a manner similar to or more
pronounced than cannabis.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
Consistent with its CB1 cannabinoid receptor agonist activity, CUMYL-4CN-
BINACA fully substituted for Δ9-THC in drug discrimination tests. This suggests
that it has abuse potential similar to that of Δ9-THC.
        Currently, use of CUMYL-4CN-BINACA has been reported only from
Europe, but this may be due to underreporting including through lack of detection
in other countries. In Europe, CUMYL-4CN-BINACA has been among the most
frequently seized synthetic cannabinoids. It is smoked (as preparations of drug
components introduced onto plant material) or vaped (i.e. using an e-cigarette)
but owing to the nature of synthetic cannabinoid products, users cannot tell
which synthetic cannabinoid is contained within such products.
       A number of cases of non-fatal intoxication involving CUMYL-4CN-
BINACA have been reported. CUMYL-4CN-BINACA has been analytically
confirmed as being present in samples from 11 fatalities and five non-fatal
intoxications in Europe. In two cases of fatal intoxication, CUMYL-4CN-
BINACA was the only drug present.

Therapeutic usefulness
CUMYL-4CN-BINACA is not known to have any therapeutic use.

Recommendation
CUMYL-4CN-BINACA is a synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonist that is used
by smoking plant material sprayed with the substance or inhaling vapour after
heating. It has effects that are similar to those of other synthetic cannabinoid
receptor agonists placed in Schedule II of the Convention on Psychotropic
Substances of 1971. Its mode of action suggests the potential for dependence and
the likelihood of abuse. There is evidence that CUMYL-4CN-BINACA has been
associated with fatal and non-fatal intoxications in a number of countries. The
substance causes substantial harm and has no therapeutic use.
        ■■ Recommendation: The Committee recommended that CUMYL-
4CN-BINACA (1-(4-cyanobutyl)-N-(2-phenylpropan-2-yl)-1H-in-
dazole-3-carboxamide) be added to Schedule II of the Convention
on Psychotropic Substances of 1971.

9.5 Cathinone
9.5.1      N-ethylnorpentylone
Substance identification
N-ethylnorpentylone (1-(2H-1,3-benzodioxol-5-yl)-2-(ethylamino)pentan-1-
one) is a ring-substituted synthetic cathinone analogue that originally emerged
in the 1960s during pharmaceutical drug development efforts. It is also known
as ephylone and N-ethylpentylone. In its pure form, N-ethylnorpentylone exists
as a racemic mixture in the form of a powder or crystalline solid. However, the
substance is usually available as a capsule, powered tablet, pill or powder often
sold as “Ecstasy” or MDMA. N-ethylnorpentylone is also available in its own
right and is advertised for sale by Internet retailers.

WHO review history
N-ethylnorpentylone has not been previously pre-reviewed or critically reviewed
by the WHO ECDD. A critical review was proposed based on information
brought to WHO’s attention that N-ethylnorpentylone poses a serious risk to
public health and has no recognized therapeutic use.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
The information currently available suggests that N-ethylnorpentylone is a
psychomotor stimulant, as users exhibit effects including sweating, agitation,
paranoia, tachycardia and cardiac arrest, which are consistent with other
cathinones and psychomotor stimulant drugs. Not all reported adverse effects
could be causally linked to N-ethylnorpentylone alone.
       Its molecular mechanism of action is similar to the synthetic cathinones
MDPV and α-PVP which are both listed in Schedule II of the Convention
on Psychotropic Substances of 1971. In vitro investigations showed that
N-ethylnorpentylone inhibited the reuptake of dopamine, noradrenaline and, to
a lesser extent, serotonin, which is consistent with other closely related cathinones
with known abuse liability.
       There is no specific information available to indicate that
N-ethylnorpentylone may be converted into a substance currently controlled
under the UN conventions.

Dependence potential
No controlled experimental studies examining the dependence potential
of N-ethylnorpentylone in humans or animals were available. However,
based on its action in the central nervous system, it would be expected that
N-ethylnorpentylone would have the capacity to produce a state of dependence
similar to that of other stimulants such as the ones listed in Schedule II of the
Convention on Psychotropic Drugs of 1971.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
In rodent drug discrimination studies, N-ethylnorpentylone fully substituted for
methamphetamine and cocaine, and it was also shown to increase activity levels,
suggesting it has potential for abuse similar to other psychomotor stimulants.
       N-Ethylnorpentylone has been detected in biological fluids collected from
a number of cases of fatal and non-fatal intoxication. It is frequently used in
combination with other drugs.
       A number of countries in various regions have reported use or detection
of this compound in seized materials or biological samples, including cases of
driving under the influence of drugs. Increased seizures of N-ethylnorpentylone
have been reported by the United States over the past 2 years. Between 2016 and
2018, a total of 125 toxicological reports associated with N-ethylnorpentylone
were documented.

Therapeutic usefulness
N-Ethylnorpentylone is not known to have any therapeutic use.

Recommendation
N-Ethylnorpentylone is a synthetic cathinone with effects that are similar to
other synthetic cathinones listed as Schedule II substances in the Convention
on Psychotropic Substances of 1971. Its mode of action and effects are consistent
with those of other cathinones, indicating that it has the potential for dependence
and the likelihood of abuse. There is evidence of use of N-ethylnorpentylone in a
number of countries in various regions, which has resulted in fatal and non-fatal
intoxication. The substance causes substantial harm and has no therapeutic use.
        ■■ Recommendation: The Committee recommended that N-ethylnor-
pentylone (1-(2H-1,3-benzodioxol-5-yl)-2-(ethylamino)pentan-1-
one) be added to Schedule II of the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic
Substances.

9.6       Medicines
9.6.1      Pregabalin
Substance identification
Chemically, pregabalin is (3S)-3-(aminomethyl)-5-methylhexanoic acid, a white
to off-white crystalline solid. It is the (S)-(+)-isomer of 3-isobutyl-gamma-
aminobutyric acid. Pregabalin is produced in various formulations including
capsules, solution and extended-release tablets available as pharmaceutical
products to be taken orally.

WHO review history
Pregabalin was pre-reviewed by the ECDD at its thirty-ninth meeting in
November 2017 and it was recommended that a critical review be undertaken.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Pregabalin is an inhibitor of alpha-2-delta subunit-containing voltage-
gated calcium channels. Through this mechanism it decreases the release of
neurotransmitters such as glutamate, noradrenaline and substance P. It has been
suggested that pregabalin exerts its therapeutic effects by reducing the neuronal
activation of hyper-excited neurons while leaving normal activation unaffected.
The mechanism(s) by which pregabalin produces euphoric effects or induces
physical dependence is unknown.
       Despite being a chemical analogue of the neurotransmitter gamma-
aminobutyric acid (GABA), pregabalin does not influence GABA activity via
either GABA receptors or benzodiazepine receptors. However, pregabalin has
been found to produce effects that are similar to those produced by controlled
substances, such as benzodiazepines, that increase GABA activity.

Dependence potential
Tolerance has been shown to develop to the effects of pregabalin, particularly
the euphoric effects. A number of published reports have described physical
dependence associated with pregabalin use in humans. The withdrawal symptoms
that occur following abrupt discontinuation of pregabalin include insomnia,
nausea, headache, anxiety, sweating and diarrhoea. Current evidence suggests
that the incidence and severity of withdrawal symptoms may be dose-related and
hence those taking doses above the normal therapeutic range are most at risk of
developing withdrawal symptoms. At therapeutic doses, withdrawal symptoms
may be minimized by gradual dose-tapering.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
While some preclinical research using self-administration and conditioned place
preference models has shown reinforcing effects of pregabalin, overall, the results
from such research are contradictory and inconclusive.
       In clinical trials, patients have reported euphoria, although tolerance to
this effect develops rapidly. Laboratory research on humans is very limited and
only a relatively low dose of pregabalin has been tested in a general population
sample; the results indicated low abuse liability. However, when a higher dose of
pregabalin was administered to users of alcohol or sedative/hypnotic drugs, it
was rated similar to diazepam, which is indicative of abuse liability.
       Pregabalin is more likely to be abused by individuals who are using other
psychoactive drugs (especially opioids) and there is a significant potential for
adverse effects among these subpopulations. The adverse effects of pregabalin
include dizziness, blurred vision, impaired coordination, impaired attention,
somnolence, confusion and impaired thinking. Other reported types of harm
associated with nonmedical use of pregabalin include suicidal ideation and
impaired driving. Users of pregabalin in a number of countries have sought
treatment for dependence on the drug.
       While pregabalin has been cited as the main cause of death in more
than 30 documented cases of fatality following overdose, very few cases of fatal
intoxication have resulted from pregabalin use alone and the vast majority of
instances involve other central nervous system depressants such as opioids and
benzodiazepines.
       Only limited information is available regarding the illicit trade in
pregabalin, but there is evidence of illicit marketing through online pharmacies.
       Pregabalin has been placed under national control in many countries in
different regions of the world.

Therapeutic usefulness
Pregabalin is used for the treatment of neuropathic pain, including painful
diabetic peripheral neuropathy and postherpetic neuralgia, fibromyalgia, anxiety
and the adjunctive treatment of partial seizures. The exact indications for which
pregabalin has received approval vary across countries. Pregabalin has also been
used to treat conditions such as substance use disorders, alcohol withdrawal
syndrome, restless legs syndrome and migraine.

Recommendation
The Committee noted that there has been increasing concern in many countries
regarding the abuse of pregabalin. Cases of dependence have been reported and
there are increasing numbers of reports of adverse effects. While these problems
are concentrated in certain drug-using populations, there are limited data on
the extent of the problems related to pregabalin abuse in the general population.
The Committee also noted that pregabalin has approved therapeutic uses for a
range of medical conditions, including some for which there are few therapeutic
options. Given the limitations of the available information regarding the abuse of
pregabalin:
         ■■ Recommendation: The Committee recommended that pregabalin
((3S)-3-(aminomethyl)-5-methylhexanoic acid) should not be
scheduled but should be kept under surveillance by the WHO
Secretariat.

9.6.2      Tramadol
Substance identification
Tramadol            ((1R*,2R*)-2-[(dimethylamino)methyl]-1-(3-methoxyphenyl)
cyclohexan-1-ol) is marketed as the hydrochloride salt and is available in a variety
of pharmaceutical formulations for oral (tablets, capsules), sublingual (drops),
intranasal, rectal (suppositories), intravenous, subcutaneous and intramuscular
administration. It is also available in combination with acetaminophen
(paracetamol). Preparations of tramadol are available as immediate- and
extended-release formulations.

WHO review history
Tramadol has been considered for critical review by the ECDD five times: in
1992, 2000, 2002, 2006 and 2014. Tramadol was pre-reviewed at the thirty-ninth
meeting of the ECDD in November 2017 and it was recommended that tramadol
be subject to a critical review at a subsequent ECDD meeting. The Committee
requested the ECDD Secretariat to collect additional data for the critical review,
including information on the extent of problems associated with tramadol
misuse in countries. Also, the Committee asked for information on the medical
use of tramadol, including the extent to which low-income countries, and aid
and relief agencies, use and possibly rely on tramadol for provision of analgesia.
In response to these requests, the ECDD Secretariat collected data from Member
States and relief agencies on the extent of medical use of tramadol, its misuse and
on the level of control implemented in countries.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Tramadol is a weak opioid analgesic that produces opioid-like effects primarily
due to its metabolite, O-desmethyltramadol. The analgesic effect of tramadol is
also believed to involve its actions on noradrenergic and serotonergic receptor
systems. The adverse effects of tramadol are consistent with its dual opioid
and non-opioid mechanisms of action and they include dizziness, nausea,
constipation and headache. Overdose leads to symptoms such as lethargy,
nausea, agitation, hostility, aggression, tachycardia, hypertension and other
cardiac complications, renal complications, seizures, respiratory depression
and coma. Serotonin syndrome (a group of symptoms associated with high
concentrations of the neurotransmitter serotonin that include elevated body
temperature, agitation, confusion, enhanced reflexes and tremor and, in some
instances, seizures and respiratory arrest) is a potential complication of the use
of tramadol in combination with other serotonergic drugs. Tramadol has been
detected in a number of postmortem samples. It is often present along with other
drugs, including opioids, benzodiazepines and antidepressants, but fatalities have
also been reported due to tramadol alone.

Dependence potential
Evidence suggests that the development of physical dependence to tramadol is
dose-related, and administration of supra-therapeutic doses leads to a similar
dependence profile to that of morphine and other opioids such as oxycodone
and methadone. There are reports of considerable numbers of people seeking
help for tramadol dependence. Withdrawal symptoms include those typical of
opioids such as pain, sweating, diarrhoea and insomnia. There are also symptoms
not normally associated with opioid use, which are related to noradrenergic and
serotonergic activity, such as hallucinations, paranoia, confusion and sensory
abnormalities. Low-dose tramadol used over extended periods is associated with
a lower risk of dependence.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
Consistent with its opioid mechanism of action, human brain imaging has
shown that tramadol activates brain reward pathways associated with abuse.
While tramadol has been reported to produce opioid-like reinforcing effects in
controlled settings and in experienced opioid users, these effects may be weaker
than those produced by opioids such as morphine. They may also be partially
offset by unpleasant effects of tramadol such as sweating, tremor, agitation,
anxiety and insomnia.
       Abuse, dependence and tramadol overdose have emerged as serious public
health concerns in countries across several regions. Epidemiological studies in
the past have reported a lower tendency for tramadol misuse when compared
to other opioids, but more recent information indicates a growing number of
people abusing tramadol, particularly in a number of African and Middle
Eastern countries. The sources of tramadol include diverted medicines as well
as falsified medicines containing high doses of tramadol. Seizures of illicitly
trafficked tramadol, particularly in African countries, have risen dramatically in
recent years.
        The oral route of administration has been the predominant mode of
tramadol abuse as it results in a greater opioid effect than other routes. It is
unlikely that when used nonmedically, tramadol is injected to any significant
extent. Abuse of tramadol is likely to be influenced by genetic factors such that
some people will experience a much stronger opioid effect following tramadol
administration than others. The genetic factors are present at different rates in
different populations across different parts of the world.
        Many countries have placed tramadol under national control.

Therapeutic usefulness
Tramadol is used to treat both acute and chronic pain of moderate to severe
intensity. The conditions for which tramadol has been used include osteoarthritis,
neuropathic pain, chronic low back pain, cancer pain and postoperative pain. It has
also been used for treatment of restless legs syndrome and in opioid withdrawal
management. As is the case with abuse potential, the analgesic efficacy and the
nature of adverse effects experienced are strongly influenced by genetic factors.
Systematic reviews have suggested that the ability of tramadol to control chronic
pain such as cancer pain is less than that of strong opioids such as morphine, and
its use is associated with a relatively high prevalence of adverse effects.
       Tramadol is listed on the national essential medicines lists of many
countries across diverse regions, but it is not listed on the WHO EML.
       As an opioid analgesic available in generic forms, which is not under
international control, tramadol is widely used in many countries where access to
other opioids for the management of pain is limited. It is also used extensively by
international aid organizations in emergency and crisis situations for the same
reasons.

Recommendations
The Committee was concerned by the increasing evidence of tramadol abuse
in a number of countries in diverse regions, in particular the widespread abuse
of tramadol in many low-to-middle-income countries. Equally concerning was
the clear lack of availability of alternative analgesics in a number of countries
and in emergency and crisis situations where tramadol is used for treatment of
moderate to severe pain. The Committee was strongly of the view that the extent
of abuse and evidence of public health risks associated with tramadol warranted
consideration of scheduling. However, it recommended that tramadol not be
scheduled at this time in order to avoid an adverse impact on access to this
medication, especially in countries where tramadol may be the only available
opioid analgesic, or in crisis situations where there is little or no access at all to
other opioids.
      The Committee also strongly urged WHO and its partners to address, as
a high priority, the grossly inadequate access to and availability of opioid pain
medication in low-income countries. WHO and its partners are also strongly
encouraged to update and disseminate WHO pain management guidelines
and to support both country-specific capacity-building needs and prevention
and treatment initiatives in order to address the tramadol crisis in low-income
countries. The Committee also recommended that WHO and its partners
support countries in strengthening their regulatory capacity and mechanisms for
preventing the supply and use of falsified and substandard tramadol.
        ■■ Recommendation: The Committee recommended that the WHO
Secretariat should continue to keep tramadol under surveillance, col-
lect information on the extent of problems associated with tramadol
misuse and on its medical use, and that tramadol be considered for
review at a future meeting.

9.7        Cannabis and cannabis-related substances
9.7.1     Cannabis and cannabis resin
Substance identification
Cannabis is a flowering plant, generally dioecious (i.e. with the male and female
flowers on separate plants). It has a characteristic odour, which is mainly
attributable to a mixture of volatile compounds, including monoterpenes,
sesquiterpenes and other terpenoid-like compounds.
       Cannabis tops and cannabis resin (sometimes referred to as “hashish”) are
typically administered via inhalation after combustion (i.e. by smoking).
Cannabis is defined in the 1961 United Nations Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs as the flowering or fruiting tops of the cannabis plant (excluding the seeds
and leaves when not accompanied by the tops) from which the resin has not been
extracted.
       Cannabis resin is defined as the separated resin, whether crude or purified,
obtained from the cannabis plant. The resinous secretions of the plant can be
collected to yield a product with a higher concentration of Δ9-THC than occurs
in the whole plant inflorescence. In addition to the secretions, cannabis resin
consists of finer plant material and appears as a loose or pressed sticky powder,
depending on the method of production.

WHO review history
Cannabis, cannabis resin, extracts and tinctures of cannabis are grouped together
in Schedule I of the 1961 United Nations Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs.
Cannabis plant and resin are also included in Schedule IV of this Convention,
which contains substances that are particularly liable to abuse and to produce ill-
effects, and do not have therapeutic advantages that offset these effects.
       A pre-review of cannabis and cannabis resin was carried out at the fortieth
meeting of the ECDD, at which time the Committee recommended a critical
review. Prior to this, cannabis had never been subject to a formal review by WHO.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
The consumption of cannabis can induce euphoria, laughter and talkativeness,
change sensory and time perception, and compromise motor control and
judgement.
       Cannabis can stimulate appetite and produce dry mouth and dizziness.
Acute cannabis use impairs certain types of cognitive function such as attention,
learning and memory.

Dependence potential
In controlled laboratory studies, experienced cannabis users readily smoke
cannabis and choose higher over lower doses. Human subjects can be trained
to readily discriminate cannabis smoke from placebo smoke. Self-reported
subjective effects associated with smoked cannabis in laboratory studies include
dose-dependent increases in ratings of “drug effect”, “high” or “stoned”. Similar
effects are produced by Δ9-THC alone when administered orally or when smoked,
indicating that the cannabis constituent responsible for the plant’s reinforcing
effects is Δ9-THC. The CB1 receptor antagonist, rimonabant, was shown, at least
in some instances, to reverse the intoxication induced by cannabis.
       International clinical diagnostic guidelines recognize the existence of
cannabis dependence: this includes the development of withdrawal symptoms
upon cessation of regular use. Symptoms of withdrawal include mood changes,
irritability, increased anger, anxiety, craving, restlessness, sleep impairment,
gastrointestinal disturbance and decreased appetite, with most individuals
reporting four or more symptoms. These symptoms typically occur within 1 to
2 days of stopping regular use, usually peak 2 to 6 days after last use, and may
last for 2 to 3 weeks. While dependence may develop as a result of regular use
of cannabis with a low percentage of Δ9-THC, regular use of cannabis with a
high percentage of Δ9-THC is associated with a greater severity of withdrawal
symptoms. Approximately 1 in 10 cannabis users develop a cannabis use disorder,
but this figure varies between studies and countries. The rates of cannabis use and
of cannabis use disorder differ considerably between countries and in different
regions of each country. Cannabis use disorder is most common in people under
30 years of age.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of abuse
Preclinical studies suggest that a lethal dose of cannabis and cannabis resin is not
likely to be obtainable by humans and there is insufficient evidence to suggest
that cannabis use increases overdose lethality from other drugs like opioids.
Cardiovascular effects following acute administration, such as tachycardia
and increased blood pressure, appear minimal or transient, and subside with
tolerance. Some studies have suggested a link between cannabis use and heart
attack, but the association is uncertain.
       Young children may be particularly vulnerable to the effects of cannabis.
Case reports indicate that young children who accidentally ingest cannabis can
experience respiratory depression, tachycardia and temporary coma.
       Cannabis consumption causes euphoria and can alter time perception.
Some users may experience anxiety and panic reactions. Acute cannabis
intoxication can precipitate a short-lasting psychotic state which reverses once
the effects of the drug have abated.
       Cannabis intoxication can impair cognitive function with effects including
decreased attention and short-term memory. Cannabis use can impair driving,
leading to a low-to-moderate (20–30%) increase in the risk of accidents. Cannabis
use impairs reaction time, lane control, speedometer monitoring, hand and body
steadiness and braking time as well as promoting inappropriate responses in an
emergency scenario.
       In addition to the acute effects of cannabis, there are effects of long-term
use. Cannabis use in young people has been associated with an increased risk of
developing psychotic disorders, although the relationship is complex and likely to
be moderated by genetic factors. Women who smoke cannabis during pregnancy
give birth to babies with birth weights that are, on average, lower than those of
women who do not smoke cannabis during pregnancy. Cannabis smoking has
been reported to lead to a 2.5-fold increase in the risk of testicular cancer.

Therapeutic usefulness
Cannabis has shown both positive outcomes and a lack of significant effect in the
treatment of loss of appetite associated with HIV/AIDS, chronic pain, Crohn’s
disease, diabetic neuropathy, neuropathic pain, migraine and cluster headaches,
and Parkinson’s disease. Further data are required to enable full assessment of the
efficacy of cannabis; however, studies have shown its possible value in a variety of
therapeutic indications.
        Cannabis preparations are currently subject to the same level of control
as cannabis under the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, Article 2,
Paragraph 3. Preparations of cannabis are used in the control of muscle spasticity
associated with multiple sclerosis, which are not always controlled by other
medications. Some patients with chronic pain have also been shown to obtain
relief from cannabis preparations when other available medications have not
been effective.
        Preclinical reports indicate that cannabinoids reduce cancer cell
proliferation, inducing apoptosis in these cells, as well as inhibiting cancer
cell migration and angiogenesis in numerous cancer cell types. Cannabinoids
and cannabis use have also been shown to have immunosuppressant and anti-
inflammatory effects in laboratory animals and humans, respectively. These
findings suggest other possible therapeutic applications for cannabis and
cannabinoids.
        Cannabis and cannabis resin are not included in the WHO EML or the
WHO Model List of Essential Medicines for Children.

Recommendation
In the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, cannabis and cannabis resin
are described, respectively, as the flowering or fruiting tops of the cannabis plant
(excluding the seeds and leaves when not accompanied by the tops) from which
the resin has not been extracted and as the separated resin, whether crude or
purified, obtained from the cannabis plant. Reference to cannabis will be taken
to also include cannabis resin. Of the many compounds in cannabis, delta-9-
tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ9-THC) is the principal psychoactive constituent, while
cannabidiol is also present but is not psychoactive.
        Following the consumption of cannabis, the adverse effects experienced
include dizziness and impairment of motor control and cognitive function. As a
result of its effects on movement and cognition, cannabis use can impair driving
ability. These acute adverse effects of cannabis consumption are similar to those
produced by Δ9-THC alone. There are particular risks associated with cannabis
exposure in young children, such as respiratory depression, tachycardia and
coma.
        Various adverse effects are associated with long-term cannabis use,
particularly an increased risk of mental health disorders such as anxiety,
depression and psychotic illness. Chronic regular cannabis use is particularly
problematic for young people because of its effects on the developing brain.
        Cannabis can cause physical dependence in people who use the drug daily
or near daily. This is evidenced by the onset of cannabis withdrawal symptoms
that occur upon abstinence; these symptoms include gastrointestinal disturbance,
appetite changes, irritability, restlessness and sleep impairment. Clinical
diagnostic guidelines such as the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, fifth edition (DSM-5) and the International Statistical Classification
of Diseases and Related Health Problems, tenth revision (ICD-10) recognize
cannabis dependence and other disorders related to cannabis use.
        The Committee considered information regarding the therapeutic
indications for cannabis and ongoing research into its possible medical
applications. Several countries permit the use of cannabis for the treatment of
medical conditions such as chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting, pain,
sleep disorders and spasticity associated with multiple sclerosis. The Committee
recognized the limited robust scientific evidence on the therapeutic use of
cannabis. However, some oral pharmaceutical preparations of cannabis have
therapeutic advantages for treatment of conditions such as certain forms of pain
and epilepsy. Preparations of cannabis are defined as a mixture, solid, or liquid
containing cannabis and are generally subject to the same control measures as
cannabis and cannabis resin as per Article 2.3 of the 1961 Single Convention on
Narcotic Drugs.
        Cannabis and cannabis resin are included in Schedule I and Schedule IV
of the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs. Substances that are included
in both these Schedules are particularly liable to abuse and to produce ill-effects
and have little or no therapeutic use. Other substances that are included in both
Schedules I and IV are fentanyl analogues, heroin and other opioids that are
considered especially dangerous. Use of all these substances is associated with
a significant risk of death, whereas cannabis use is not associated with such risk.
        The evidence presented to the Committee did not indicate that cannabis
and cannabis resin were particularly liable to produce ill-effects similar to the
effects of the other substances in Schedule IV of the 1961 Single Convention on
Narcotic Drugs. In addition, preparations of cannabis have shown therapeutic
potential for treatment of pain and other medical conditions such as epilepsy and
spasticity associated with multiple sclerosis, which are not always controlled by
other medications. Cannabis and cannabis resin should therefore be scheduled at
a level of control that will prevent harm caused by their use but, at the same time,
will not act as a barrier to access and to research and development of cannabis-
related preparations for medical use.
        The Committee concluded that cannabis and cannabis resin do not meet
the criteria for placement in Schedule IV.
        The Committee then considered whether cannabis and cannabis resin
were better placed in Schedule I or Schedule II of the 1961 Single Convention on
Narcotic Drugs. While the Committee did not consider that cannabis is associated
with the same level of risk to health as that posed by most of the other drugs
placed in Schedule I, it noted the high rates of public health problems arising
from cannabis use and the global extent of such problems. For these reasons,
it recommended that cannabis and cannabis resin continue to be included in
Schedule I of the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs.
        ■■ Recommendation: The Committee recommended that cannabis and
cannabis resin be deleted from Schedule IV of the 1961 Single Con-
vention on Narcotic Drugs.

9.7.2     delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ9-THC; dronabinol)
Substance identification
To date, more than 500 naturally occurring compounds have been identified in
the cannabis plant, including cannabinoids (more than 100 chemicals unique
to the plant), terpenoids and alkaloids. Δ9-THC is thought to be the principal
intoxicant constituent of Cannabis sativa.
       Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol refers to the following four stereoisomers:
        ■■ (−)-trans-delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (also known as dronabinol)
        ■■ (+)-trans-delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
        ■■ (−)-cis-delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
        ■■ (+)-cis-delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
      The stereoisomer (−)-trans-Δ9-THC is the only one that occurs naturally in the
cannabis plant and is generally the only stereoisomer that has been studied.
Dronabinol is the INN for this isomer. Where the term “Δ9-THC” is used in this
report without further specification, it refers to (−)-trans-Δ9-THC or dronabinol.
If reference is made to a different isomer, this will be explicitly specified.
        For therapeutic use, dronabinol is supplied as gelatine capsules (Marinol®)
for oral use, and as an oral solution (Syndros®).

WHO review history
        Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ9-THC) and its stereochemical variants,
with one variant being dronabinol ((−)-trans-Δ9-THC), are currently in Schedule
II of the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances. Δ9-THC, together with
its stereochemical variants, was originally included in Schedule I of the 1971
Convention at the time of its adoption.
         ■■ In 1989, the WHO ECDD recommended, based on the critical
review of dronabinol undertaken at its twenty-sixth meeting in 1988,
that dronabinol be moved to Schedule II while keeping the other
isomers and stereochemical variants in Schedule I. WHO’s proposal
to transfer dronabinol to Schedule II was rejected by the CND at its
eleventh special session in 1990.
         ■■ At its twenty-seventh meeting in 1990, the ECDD carried out a critical
review of updated information on Δ9-THC. It recommended that Δ9-
THC and its stereochemical variants be rescheduled from Schedule I
to Schedule II of the 1971 Convention. This was proposed in order to
avoid a distinction between Δ9-THC and its stereochemical variants,
their placement under different Schedules and to prevent potential
legal and forensic analytical problems. This recommendation was
adopted by the CND at its thirty-fourth session in 1991.
         ■■ At its thirty-third meeting in 2002, Δ9-THC was again critically
reviewed by the ECDD. The Committee recommended that dronabinol
and its stereochemical variants be rescheduled from Schedule II to
Schedule IV of the 1971 Convention. However, no further procedural
steps were taken, i.e. there was no formal communication of this
recommendation from WHO to the CND.
         ■■ At its thirty-fourth meeting in 2006, the ECDD carried out an
assessment of an updated critical review of dronabinol. The Committee
concluded that although dronabinol constitutes a substantial risk to
public health, this risk is different from those related to cannabis,
which is controlled under the 1961 Convention. The substance was
found to have moderate therapeutic usefulness, and an increase in
its medical use was likely as a result of continuing clinical research.
   Therefore, the Committee recommended that dronabinol and its
stereochemical variants be rescheduled from Schedule II to Schedule
III of the 1971 Convention.
 ■■ In March 2007, at its fiftieth session, the CND decided by consensus not
to vote on the recommendation of WHO to transfer dronabinol and its
stereochemical variants from Schedule II to Schedule III of the 1971
Convention. Furthermore, the CND requested WHO, in consultation
with INCB, as appropriate, to undertake, for consideration by the
Commission, a review of dronabinol and its stereochemical variants
when additional information became available (CND Decision 50/2).
     ■■ At its thirty-fifth meeting in 2012, the ECDD discussed the CND’s
recommendations of 2007. The Committee did not carry out a review
of dronabinol, but reinstated the recommendation made at its thirty-
fourth meeting to move dronabinol and its stereochemical variants
from Schedule II to Schedule III of the 1971 Convention. The ECDD
decided that its earlier decision on dronabinol and its stereochemical
variants should stand, since it was unaware of any new evidence that
was likely to materially alter the scheduling recommendation made at
its thirty-fourth meeting. This recommendation was communicated
by the Director-General of WHO to the UN Secretary-General in
October 2012.
        ■■ The CND reconsidered this issue in March 2013 at its fifty-sixth
session. Concern was expressed by several delegations that, despite the
recommendation received from WHO, no decision had yet been taken
by the Commission to reschedule dronabinol and its stereochemical
variants. A number of delegations noted that they were not able to
support the recommendation made by WHO regarding dronabinol,
as that recommendation could hinder efforts to prevent international
cannabis abuse and could send a confusing message regarding the
harm associated with the use of cannabis. It was suggested that WHO
should continue reviewing dronabinol.
       ■■ In March 2014, based on the recommendation made by the ECDD
at its thirty-fifth meeting in 2012, the CND voted against moving
dronabinol and its stereochemical variants from Schedule II to
Schedule III of the 1971 Convention.
         ■■ At its thirty-eighth meeting in 2016 the ECDD requested that Δ9-
THC be pre-reviewed together with cannabis and cannabis resin,
extracts and tinctures of cannabis, cannabidiol and isomers of THC.
         ■■ At its fortieth meeting in June 2018 the ECDD evaluated the
above-mentioned pre-reviews and recommended to proceed to the
critical reviews of cannabis and cannabis resin, extracts and tinctures
of cannabis, Δ9-THC and isomers of THC at the forty-first meeting
in November 2018.

Similarity to other known substances and effects on the central nervous
system
In humans, Δ9-THC has very similar pharmacological and subjective effects
to those of cannabis. Users may exhibit euphoria, laughter and increased
talkativeness. Δ9-THC increases appetite, causes dry mouth and occasional
dizziness and alters visual, olfactory and auditory perceptions. Δ9-THC can
cause subtle cognitive deficits such as impairment of attention and short-term
memory. Higher doses of Δ9-THC are associated with anxiety, panic, confusion
and disorientation in some users. Δ9-THC can also provoke transient psychosis-
like phenomena in some healthy participants.
       Δ9-THC has very low potential to produce lethal effects. It has been
calculated that a lethal dose for a 70-kg human would be approximately 4 g
and that such a dose would not typically be achieved in a human following oral
consumption, smoking or vaporizing the substance.
       Acute exposure of humans to Δ9-THC produces tachycardia; however,
tolerance may occur to these effects, and decreases in blood pressure and heart
rate may occur with subsequent exposures. Δ9-THC is a bronchodilator. While
in vitro and in vivo studies in animals demonstrate that high doses of Δ9-THC
can modulate the immune system in complex ways, two studies in humans in
which low doses of Δ9-THC were administered, found no significant effects on
the immune system.
       Oral Δ9-THC is reported to cause impairment of driving skills in both
driving simulators and on roads. Doses of 10 and 20 mg of Δ9-THC increased
standard deviation of lateral position (indicative of loss of road-tracking control)
and time taken to adapt speed (indicative of increased reaction times).

Dependence potential
In animal models, marked tolerance develops to the effects of Δ9-THC. The effects
of spontaneous withdrawal following cessation of chronic administration appear
relatively mild, but antagonist-precipitated withdrawal is characterized by clear
somatic signs such as tremor and ataxia.
       Tolerance has also been demonstrated in humans and there is evidence
of a withdrawal syndrome on cessation following administration for a period as
short as 4 days. The doses of Δ9-THC administered in the studies demonstrating
withdrawal exceeded the doses used in clinical trials for therapeutic applications.
Sleep disruption appears to be the most prominent symptom of withdrawal from
Δ9-THC.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of abuse
Pharmaceutical products containing Δ9-THC do not appear to be abused. Orally
administered pharmaceutical preparations containing Δ9-THC appear to have
only weak reinforcing properties in humans, with low and variable rates of self-
administration. Smoked cannabis is much preferred. Evidence concerning the
medical use of Δ9-THC shows no diversion of the pharmaceutical product for
nonmedical purposes and no evidence of abuse.
      There is no significant evidence concerning the reinforcing effects of
smoked or vaporized pure Δ9-THC in humans. However, newer (nonmedical)
preparations of the cannabis plant, principally as extracts, contain very high
concentrations of Δ9-THC, sometimes exceeding 80%. Such preparations,
including butane hash oil, are administered by inhalation of vapour after heating.
Previously, the only relatively pure Δ9-THC preparations were medicinal. The
development of high-purity Δ9-THC products is associated with significant
health risks, including increased risk of dependence.

Therapeutic usefulness
Δ9-THC (dronabinol) is approved in a number of countries for indications
including anorexia associated with weight loss in patients with acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and for nausea and vomiting associated
with cancer chemotherapy in patients who do not gain adequate relief from
conventional antiemetic treatment.
       Δ9-THC has been explored for other indications. For example, it has
demonstrated at least partial effectiveness in decreasing neuropathic pain,
reducing anxiety in patients with chronic pain, increasing weight gain in
patients with anorexia nervosa, decreasing pain intensity and increasing patient
satisfaction when given as an adjunct to opioids for chronic pain, reducing
spasticity in patients with multiple sclerosis, and for improving tics (or a trend
towards such improvement) in patients with Tourette’s syndrome.
       Δ9-THC (dronabinol) is not listed on the WHO EML (twentieth list) or the
WHO Model List of Essential Medicines for Children (sixth list).

Recommendation
The main psychoactive substance in the cannabis plant is one of the four
stereoisomers of Δ9-THC. This substance has therapeutic uses and is sometimes
known by its International Nonproprietary Name dronabinol. It is currently
placed in Schedule II of the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances.
         At the time of the adoption of the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs, scientific research had not identified Δ9-THC as the main psychoactive
compound in cannabis. Subsequently, Δ9-THC was included in the 1971
Convention on Psychotropic Substances at its inception. In previous ECDD
reviews, the active and naturally occurring stereoisomer of Δ9-THC known
as dronabinol had been considered in a synthetic form as a pharmaceutical
preparation. Following a recommendation from the ECDD at its twenty-
seventh meeting, dronabinol was placed in Schedule II of the 1971 Convention
on Psychotropic Substances. However, the CND did not adopt a subsequent
recommendation to place dronabinol in Schedule III of the 1971 Convention on
Psychotropic Substances.
         The Committee noted that whereas in these previous ECDD reviews Δ9-
THC, and especially its active stereoisomer dronabinol, had been considered in
a synthetic form as a pharmaceutical preparation, Δ9-THC today also refers to
the main psychoactive component of cannabis and the principal compound in
illicit cannabis-derived psychoactive products. Some of these products contain
Δ9-THC at concentrations as high as 90%. Butane hash oil is an example of a
cannabis-derived product containing high-purity Δ9-THC, which has recently
emerged and is used by heating and inhalation of the vapour. In derived forms of
such high purity, Δ9-THC produces ill-effects, dependence and abuse potential
that is at least as great as that produced by cannabis, which is placed in Schedule
I of the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs.
         A substance liable to similar abuse and productive of similar ill-effects to
those of a substance already scheduled within the 1961 Single Convention on
Narcotic Drugs would normally be scheduled in the same way as that substance.
As Δ9-THC is liable to similar abuse to cannabis and has similar ill-effects, it
meets the criteria for inclusion in Schedule I of the 1961 Single Convention
on Narcotic Drugs. It was further recognized that cocaine, the principal active
compound in coca is placed together with coca leaf in Schedule I of the 1961
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs. Futhermore, morphine, the principal
active compound in opium, is placed with opium in the same Schedule. Placing
Δ9-THC, the principal active compound in cannabis, in the same Schedule as
cannabis would be consistent with this approach.
          ■■ Recommendation: The Committee recommended that dronabinol
and its stereoisomers (delta-9- tetrahydrocannabinol) be added to
Schedule I of the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs.
      As indicated in the Guidance on the WHO review of psychoactive
substances for international control (4), to facilitate efficient administration of the
international control system, it is not advisable to place a substance under more
than one Convention. Accordingly:
        ■■ Recommendation: The Committee recommended the deletion of
dronabinol and its stereoisomers (delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol)
from the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances, Schedule II,
subject to the Commission’s adoption of the recommendation to add
dronabinol and its stereoisomers (delta-9- tetrahydrocannabinol) to
Schedule I of the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs.
        Based on requests received from Member States and information received
from other United Nations agencies, the Committee understood that placing
Δ9-THC under the same Convention and in the same Schedule as cannabis –
Schedule I of the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs – would greatly
facilitate the implementation of the control measures of the conventions in
Member States.

9.7.3     Tetrahydrocannabinol (isomers of THC)
Substance identification
The isomers of THC include six molecules that are identified in Schedule I of the
Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971 including their stereochemical
variants. These molecules with their chemical designations are listed in Table 1.
Most exist only for the purpose of scientific research; however, there appears to
be no ongoing scientific research about their use. This entry in the Schedules does
not include delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (dronabinol).
    Table 1.
    Molecules of THC with their chemical designations
    Molecule            Substance identification
    delta-6a(10a)-THC   7,8,9,10-tetrahydro-6,6,9-trimethyl-3-pentyl-6H-dibenzo[b,d]pyran-1-ol
    delta-6a(7)-THC     (9R,10aR)-8,9,10,10a-tetrahydro-6,6,9-trimethyl-3-pentyl-6H-dibenzo[b,d]pyran-1-ol
    delta-7-THC         (6aR,9R,10aR)-6a,9,10,10a-tetrahydro-6,6,9-trimethyl-3- pentyl-6H-dibenzo[b,d]pyran-1-ol
    delta-8-THC         (6aR,10aR)-6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydro-6,6,9-trimethyl-3-pentyl-6H-dibenzo[b,d]pyran-1-ol
    delta-10-THC        6a,7,8,9-tetrahydro-6,6,9-trimethyl-3-pentyl-6H-dibenzo[b,d]pyran-1-ol
    delta-9(11)-THC     (6aR,10aR)-6a,7,8,9,10,10a-hexahydro-6,6-dimethyl-9-methylene3-pentyl-6H-dibenzo[b,d]pyran-1-ol

WHO review history
Isomers of THC were pre-reviewed at the fortieth ECDD meeting and
recommended for a critical review.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Both Δ8-THC and Δ9,11-THC produce Δ9-THC-like pharmacological effects in
some animal models, whereas Δ10-THC does not. In humans, Δ8-THC is active
when administered via several different routes, for example, oral, intravenous
and inhalation. Δ6a,10a-THC has psychoactive effects in humans similar to those
of Δ9-THC but is less potent. Δ6a,10a-THC also produces Δ9-THC-like effects when
smoked, but the effects are less marked and have a shorter duration than those of
Δ9-THC. None of the other isomers have been tested in humans.

Dependence potential
There is no available evidence from either animal or human studies to determine
the potential for dependence of any of the six isomers of THC. Moreover, there
has been no definitive study of the mechanism(s) of action of the isomers and
hence it is not possible to extrapolate from an understanding of the mechanism
to the likely dependence potential.

Actual abuse and/or extent of abuse
Data from both human and animal studies relevant to abuse potential are at best
very limited and, for some isomers, non-existent. It is not possible to assess the
abuse potential of any of the isomers based on a clearly established mechanism
of action. There is no evidence of actual abuse (in contrast to abuse potential) for
any of the isomers studied.
       In animal drug discrimination tests, Δ9,11-THC has been shown to substitute
for Δ9-THC in most studies and induces characteristic CB1 agonist effects,
including suppression of locomotor activity, hypothermia, antinociception and
ring immobility. Δ8-THC induces characteristic CB1 agonist effects and Δ9-THC-
like discriminative effects. These two compounds were less potent than Δ9-THC.
In contrast, Δ10-THC failed to show Δ9-THC-like discriminative effects in an
animal model.
       Only very limited data on the abuse potential of these isomers in humans
are available. The two isomers that were assessed, Δ8-THC and Δ6a,10a-THC, each
produced similar subjective effects to those of Δ9-THC when administered by
various routes.
       In summary, there is evidence from animal and human studies that Δ8-
THC has abuse potential of a type similar to Δ9-THC. There is much more limited
evidence of abuse potential for Δ9,11-THC and Δ6a,10a-THC based on animal and
human research, respectively. For Δ10-THC, the only evidence is negative and for
the two remaining isomers there is no evidence.

Therapeutic usefulness
The six isomers listed under Schedule I of the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic
Substances are not known to have any therapeutic uses.

Recommendations
There are currently six isomers of THC listed in Schedule I of the 1971
Convention on Psychotropic Substances. These six isomers are chemically similar
to Δ9-THC, which is currently listed in Schedule II of the 1971 Convention on
Psychotropic Substances. The Committee has recommended deleting Δ9-THC
from this Schedule and including it in Schedule I of the 1961 Single Convention
on Narcotic Drugs.
      While the six isomers are chemically similar to Δ9-THC, there is little or no
evidence concerning their abuse potential and acute intoxicating effects. There
are no reports that the THC isomers listed in Schedule I of the 1971 Convention
induce physical dependence, or that they are being abused or are likely to be
abused so as to constitute a public health or social problem. There are no reported
medical or veterinary uses of these isomers.
      While the Committee recognized that available evidence has not
demonstrated abuse and ill-effects of these isomers similar to those associated
with Δ9-THC, it noted that, due to the chemical similarity of each of the six
isomers to Δ9-THC, it is very difficult to differentiate any of these six isomers
from Δ9-THC using standard methods of chemical analysis.
      Recommendation:           The        Committee           recommended         that
tetrahydrocannabinol (understood to refer to the six isomers currently listed
in Schedule I of the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances) be added
to Schedule I of the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, subject to the
Commission’s adoption of the recommendation to add dronabinol (delta-9-
tetrahydrocannabinol) to Schedule I of the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs.
      As indicated in the Guidance on the WHO review of psychoactive
substances for international control (4), to facilitate efficient administration of the
international control system, it is not advisable to place a substance under more
than one Convention.
         ■■ Recommendation:          The      Committee         recommended        that
tetrahydrocannabinol (understood to refer to the six isomers
currently listed in Schedule I of the 1971 Convention on
Psychotropic Substances) be deleted from the 1971 Convention on
Psychotropic Substances, subject to the Commission’s adoption of the
recommendation to add tetrahydrocannabinol to Schedule I of the
1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs.
       The Committee acknowledged that placing these six isomers under the
same Convention and in the same Schedule as Δ9-THC would facilitate the
implementation of international control of Δ9-THC, as well as assist Member
States in the implementation of control measures at country level.

9.7.4      Extracts and tinctures of cannabis
Substance identification
Extracts and tinctures of cannabis are preparations that have been extracted
from the leaves and flowers of Cannabis sativa. They include cannabis oils, teas
and Sativex® (an extract with approximately equal quantities of Δ9-THC and
cannabidiol). Cannabis undergoes an extraction process in order to separate the
desired compounds such as cannabinoids from the undesired products. Extracts
can exhibit variations of shade of colour, taste, smell and consistency, ranging
from a runny oil to a solid depending on the manufacturing process. They can
also take the form of alcohol or aqueous preparations.
       Cannabis extracts may be delivered through various routes of
administration, including sublingual, oral, inhalation (smoking or vaping), rectal
and transdermal. “Dosage” of cannabis extracts most often refers to the amount
of Δ9-THC contained in the preparation. Tinctures are usually administered
sublingually or added to edibles or beverages for oral consumption. Oils may be
incorporated into food or beverages for oral administration or may be vaped or
“dabbed” (inhalation of vapour from a heated preparation). Sativex® is formulated
into an oromucosal spray.

Oils
Oils can be produced with a range of Δ9-THC concentrations. Those with
the highest concentration are butane hash oil and propane hash oil, which
may contain from 50 to 90% of the active ingredient, Δ9-THC. Oils with high
concentrations of cannabidiol can also be produced by extraction using a variety
of methods. Some oils, such as essential oil and hemp seed oil, do not contain
significant concentrations of Δ9-THC or cannabidiol.
       Cannabis oil extracts can also be incorporated into a wide range of food
products.

Aqueous extracts
An aqueous extract of C. sativa is often referred to as a tea. The addition of
boiling water is a simple and probably one of the oldest methods for preparing a
cannabis extract for oral administration. The amount of Δ9-THC extracted using
this method is significantly lower than what would be obtainable using other
methods.

Sativex®
Sativex® is a unique cannabis extract with an approximate 1:1 ratio of Δ9-
THC to cannabidiol, as the principal cannabinoids, together with other minor
cannabinoids delivered as an oromucosal spray approved for medical purposes.

WHO review history
Cannabis extracts and tinctures of cannabis are listed in Schedule I of the Single
Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961.
       Cannabis extracts and tinctures were pre-reviewed at the fortieth meeting
of the ECDD and were recommended for critical review.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Effects produced by Δ9-THC-rich cannabis extracts, tinctures, oils and tea are
similar to those observed with Δ9-THC, but, as noted above, the effects may
be more pronounced and associated with a greater risk of adverse effects, such
as cardiovascular effects, when extracts with high Δ9-THC concentrations are
inhaled.
       The most common adverse effects of Sativex® are mild to moderate dizziness
and fatigue. Transient adverse effects such as increased heart rate and blood
pressure, disorientation, depression, euphoria, transient psychotic reactions and
dissociation have also been reported.

Dependence potential
The psychoactive constituent, Δ9-THC, present in most of the extracts, has been
shown to have dependence potential, as supported by numerous animal and
human studies. There is evidence that regular use of certain cannabis extracts
with high concentrations of Δ9-THC, such as butane hash oil, increases the
probability and severity of dependence.

Actual abuse and/or extent of abuse
There is little epidemiological information on the extent of use of cannabis
extracts. The information that is available suggests that extracts in the form of
oil or wax containing high levels of Δ9-THC are used by a minority of cannabis
users. However, this rate may be increasing and the use of such extracts appears
to be associated with higher levels of physical dependence on cannabis.
       Information on the toxicology of cannabis extracts, tinctures, oils and tea
is also very limited. The toxicity produced by Δ9-THC-rich cannabis extracts,
tinctures, oils and tea is similar to the toxicity of Δ9-THC. However, as noted
above, the effects may be more pronounced, with a greater risk of adverse effects,
when extracts with high Δ9-THC concentrations are inhaled.
       Depending on the method used to produce it, cannabis extract may
contain residual solvents (naphtha, isopropanol, acetone, hexane, ethyl alcohol
or butane), which are harmful if ingested by the user and may cause serious
burns when ignited. Some extracts contain contaminants such as pesticides.
Thinning agents such as propylene glycol and polyethylene glycol 400 (used to
smooth the flow of viscous cannabis oils from vaping cartridges) can produce
high concentrations of toxic acetaldehyde and formaldehyde when heated in
certain devices. In addition, terpenes can be converted to the toxic degradants
methacrolein (an irritant) and benzene (a carcinogen).
       Vaping and smoking are known to produce rapid psychoactive effects.
However, the abuse potential of high-potency cannabis extracts administered via
vaporizing has not been studied in humans.
       A clinical trial to evaluate the abuse potential of Sativex® in recreational
cannabis users showed that high doses of Δ9-THC induced cannabis-like effects,
but this did not occur at a lower dose. Abuse has not been reported in post-market
surveillance of Sativex®. However, euphoria has been reported as an adverse effect
of Sativex®.

Therapeutic usefulness
Sativex® has been granted marketing authorizations for treatment of spasticity
due to multiple sclerosis in several countries, and for treatment of neuropathic
pain in multiple sclerosis and chronic cancer pain. Sativex® is being investigated
for a variety of other indications including, but not limited to, anxiety disorder,
cannabis use disorder, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, and depression
and sleep disorders.
        Cannabis extracts and tinctures are not listed on the WHO EML (twentieth
list) or the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines for Children (sixth list).

Recommendations
Extracts and tinctures of cannabis include preparations that are produced by
application of solvents to cannabis, and they are currently in Schedule I of the
1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs. Extracts and tinctures include both
medical preparations, such as that containing an approximately equal mixture of
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (dronabinol; Δ9-THC) and cannabidiol and nonmedical
preparations with high concentrations of Δ9-THC such as butane hash oil.
While the medical extracts and tinctures are administered orally, nonmedical
preparations such as butane hash oil are normally inhaled through vaporization.
There are also extracts with no psychoactive effects that contain cannabidiol.
       The Committee recognized that the term “extracts and tinctures of
cannabis” as cited in the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs encompasses
these diverse preparations some of which have psychoactive properties and some
which do not. The Committee also recognized that the variability in psychoactive
properties of these preparations is due principally to varying concentrations of
Δ9-THC, which is currently scheduled in the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic
Substances, and that some extracts and tinctures of cannabis without psychoactive
properties, and including predominantly cannabidiol, have promising therapeutic
applications.
       As per the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, preparations are
defined as mixtures, solid, or liquid containing a substance in Schedule I or II
and are generally subject to the same measures of control as that substance. The
Committee noted that, by this definition, the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs may cover all products that are “extracts and tinctures” of cannabis as
“preparations” of cannabis and also, if the Committee`s recommendation to
move dronabinol to Schedule I of the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs
was adopted, as “preparations” of dronabinol and its stereoisomers.
       Recommendation: The Committee recommended deleting “extracts and
tinctures of cannabis” from Schedule I of the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs.
       The Committee acknowledged that the fact that diverse preparations
with a variable concentration of Δ9-THC are controlled within the same entry
“extract and tinctures” under the same Schedule, is a challenge for the authorities
responsible for implementing control measures in their respective countries.

9.7.5     Cannabidiol preparations
Summary
At its fortieth meeting the ECDD considered a critical review of cannabidiol and
recommended that preparations considered to be pure cannabidiol should not
be scheduled within the international drug control conventions. Cannabidiol is
found in cannabis and cannabis resin, but does not have psychoactive properties
and has no potential for abuse and no potential to produce dependence. It does
not have significant ill-effects. Cannabidiol has been shown to be effective in the
management of certain treatment-resistant, childhood-onset epilepsy disorders.
It was approved for this use in the United States in 2018 and is currently under
consideration for approval by the European Union.
        ■■ Cannabidiol can be chemically synthesized or it can be prepared
from the cannabis plant. The approved medication (Epidiolex®)
is a preparation of the cannabis plant. The Committee noted
that medicines without psychoactive effects that are produced as
preparations of the cannabis plant will contain trace amounts of Δ9-
THC (dronabinol). The cannabidiol preparation approved for the
treatment of childhood-onset epilepsy, Epidiolex®, contains not more
than 0.15% Δ9-THC by weight and has no effects indicative of potential
for abuse or dependence. In keeping with the recommendation of
the fortieth ECDD that preparations considered pure cannabidiol
not be controlled, the Committee recognized that trace levels of Δ9-
THC may be found in such preparations, such as the concentration
of 0.15% in Epidiolex®. The Committee acknowledged that chemical
analysis of Δ9-THC to an accuracy of 0.15% may be difficult for
some Member States, and considered existing national capacities to
accurately detect trace amounts of Δ9-THC up to 0.2%.

Recommendation
The Committee recommended that a footnote be
added to Schedule I of the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs
to read: “Preparations containing predominantly cannabidiol and not
more than 0.2 per cent of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol are not under
international control.”
       The Committee noted precedence in the use of footnotes in the
Schedules relating to levomethorphan and levorphanol, whose stereoisomers,
dextromethorphan and dextrorphan, would normally be subject to the same level
of control under Schedule I of the 1961 Convention. Because these substances are
not liable to abuse or to produce dependence and are used medically, a footnote
was used to indicate that dextromethorphan and dextrorphan are not under
international control.

9.7.6      Pharmaceutical preparations of cannabis and delta-9-
         tetrahydrocannabinol (dronabinol)
Summary
There are currently two main types of registered medicines that contain Δ9-
THC (dronabinol). One is a preparation of cannabis that contains both the
psychoactive Δ9-THC and the non-psychoactive cannabidiol in approximately
equal concentrations (Sativex®). This is used for the treatment of spasticity and
neuropathic pain due to multiple sclerosis, and to treat chronic cancer pain.
       The second type contains only Δ9-THC as the active compound and is used
for the treatment of anorexia associated with weight loss in patients with AIDS
and for nausea and vomiting associated with cancer chemotherapy in patients
who have not responded adequately to conventional antiemetic treatments.
Currently approved medicines with Δ9-THC as the only active compound (for
example, Marinol®, Syndros®) use synthetically produced Δ9-THC, although it is
possible in the future that medicines with equivalent amounts of Δ9-THC could
be prepared from cannabis. There is no difference between the therapeutic effects
or adverse effects of synthetic Δ9-THC and Δ9-THC produced from cannabis
plants. These medicines are all taken orally and are approved for use in a number
of countries.
       These Δ9-THC-containing medicines have not been found to be associated
with problems of abuse and dependence and they are not diverted for the purpose
of nonmedical use.
       The Committee recognized that such pharmaceutical preparations are
formulated in a way that means they are not likely to be abused. Furthermore,
there is no evidence of actual abuse or ill-effects to an extent that would justify the
current level of control associated with Schedule I of the 1961 Single Convention
on Narcotic Drugs for cannabis-based preparations such as Sativex®, or the level
of control associated with Schedule II of the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic
Substances, for preparations using synthetic Δ9-THC such as Marinol® and
Syndros®.
       In order not to impede access to these medicines and in reference to
Article 3.4 of the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs:

Recommendation
The Committee recommended that preparations
containing delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (dronabinol), produced
either by chemical synthesis or as a preparation of cannabis, that are
compounded as pharmaceutical preparations with one or more other
ingredients and in such a way that delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
(dronabinol) cannot be recovered by readily available means or in
a yield which would constitute a risk to public health, be added to
Schedule III of the 1961 Convention on Narcotic Drugs.
