
2.1      Synthetic cannabinoids
2.1.1 APINACA (AKB-48)
Substance identification
APINACA (N-(adamantan-1-yl)-1-pentyl-1H-indazole-3-carboxamide), also
known as AKB-48, is a synthetic cannabinoid. It has been found as a white
powder, in solution or sprayed on plant material.

WHO review history
APINACA (AKB-48) was reviewed at the 36th meeting of WHO Expert
Committee on Drug Dependence and has been under surveillance by WHO
since that time. The present critical review updates the previous review.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
APINACA binds as a full agonist to CB1 and CB2 cannabinoid receptors. It
shares similar molecular mechanisms and functional properties with other
synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonists that are currently controlled under the
Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971.
      In preclinical studies in mice, APINACA produced neurological signs,
including convulsions, hyperreflexia, myoclonus and aggression.
      No information was available in either controlled studies or case reports
on the effects of APINACA on the human central nervous system.

Dependence potential
No controlled experimental studies on the dependence potential of APINACA in
either human subjects or laboratory animals are available. In view of its action on
the central nervous system as a full CB1 agonist, APINACA would be expected to
produce dependence in a manner similar to other synthetic cannabinoids.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
In drug discrimination tests in animals predictive of subjective effects in humans,
APINACA shows typical cannabinoid-like effects and would therefore be likely to
be abused. APINACA also stimulates dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens
in mice, suggesting that its abuse potential is similar to that of other psychoactive
cannabinoids.
       Use of APINACA has been reported from five regions and 20 countries
since 2015. It has been identified in seized materials and has been detected in the
blood of impaired drivers. Data on seized material, however, indicates that use of
APINACA has decreased in a number of countries.

Therapeutic usefulness
APINACA is not known to have any therapeutic use.

Recommendation
APINACA (N-(adamantan-1-yl)-1-pentyl-1H-indazole-3-carboxamide; also
known as AKB-48) is a synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonist. While it may
potentially have effects that are similar to those of other synthetic cannabinoids,
information on its effects in humans is currently lacking. The magnitude of the
public health problem associated with use of APINACA may not be great as the
use of this substance has declined.
          ■ Recommendation: The Committee recommended that APINACA
(N-(adamantan-1-yl)-1-pentyl-1H-indazole-3-carboxamide) be kept
under surveillance.

2.1.2 AB-FUBINACA
Substance identification
AB-FUBINACA          (1-amino-3-methyl-1-oxobutan-2-yl]-1-[(4-fluorophenyl)
methyl]indazole-3-carboxamide) is a synthetic cannabinoid. It has been found
sprayed on plant material for smoking.

WHO review history
AB-FUBINACA has not been reviewed previously. A critical review was proposed
on the basis of information brought to WHO’s attention that AB-FUBINACA
was manufactured clandestinely, poses a risk to public health and society and has
no therapeutic use recognized by any Party.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
AB-FUBINACA is a synthetic cannabinoid with a profile of centrally mediated
effects similar to those of other synthetic cannabinoids. It is a potent full agonist
at CB1 receptors and binds to CB2 receptors. It is a structural analogue of ADB-
FUBINACA, which is currently controlled under the Convention on Psychotropic
Substances of 1971.
       In preclinical studies in mice, AB-FUBINACA produced pharmacological
effects characteristic of psychoactive cannabinoids, including suppression of
locomotor activity, antinociception, hypothermia and catalepsy. These effects
were reversed by a CB1 antagonist. AB-FUBINACA also impaired coordination
and balance and produced neurological signs such as convulsions, hyperreflexia,
myoclonus, sensorimotor alterations and spontaneous aggressiveness.
       Little information is available on its effects on the human central
nervous system. In a case report in which AB-FUBINACA was used with ADB-
FUBINACA, the clinical features of intoxication included confusion, agitation,
somnolence, hypertension and tachycardia, similar to those with other synthetic
cannabinoid receptor agonists.

Dependence potential
No controlled experimental studies of the dependence potential of AB-
FUBINACA in humans or animals were available. In view of its action as a full
CB1 agonist in the central nervous system, however, AB-FUBINACA would
be expected to produce dependence in a manner similar to other synthetic
cannabinoids.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
      In tests of drug discrimination in animals predictive of subjective effects
in humans, AB-FUBINACA had typical cannabinoid-like effects and would
therefore be likely to be abused.
      Many cases of intoxication with AB-FUBINACA have been reported.
At least one death has been reported in which AB-FUBINACA was the only
synthetic cannabinoid detected.
      AB-FUBINACA has been seized in a number of countries in various
regions.

Therapeutic usefulness
AB- FUBINACA is not known to have any therapeutic use.

Recommendation
AB-FUBINACA is a synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonist with a mode of
action that suggests the likelihood of dependence and abuse and similar ill-
effects to other synthetic cannabinoids. Its use has been associated with a wide
range of severe adverse effects, including death. The effects are similar to those
of other synthetic cannabinoids that have the same mechanism of action as AB-
FUBINACA and which are in Schedule II of the Convention on Psychotropic
Substances of 1971. AB-FUBINACA has no therapeutic use.
          ■ Recommendation: The Committee recommended that AB-FUBIN-
ACA (1-amino-3-methyl-1-oxobutan-2-yl]-1-[(4-fluorophenyl)me-
thyl]indazole-3-carboxamide) be added to Schedule II of the Con-
vention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971.

2.1.3 5F-AMB-PINACA
Substance identification
5F-AMB-PINACA (methyl 2-({[1-(5-fluoropentyl)-1H-indazol-3-yl]carbonyl}
amino)-3-methylbutanoate, is a synthetic cannabinoid. It is likely to be sprayed
on plant material for smoking.

WHO review history
5F-AMB-PINACA has not been reviewed previously. A critical review was
proposed on the basis of information brought to WHO’s attention that 5F-AMB-
PINACA is manufactured clandestinely, poses a risk to public health and society
and has no therapeutic use recognized by any Party.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
5F-AMB-PINACA binds to CB1 and CB2 receptors with full agonist activity at
the CB1 receptor. It has molecular mechanisms and functional properties similar
to those of other synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonists that are currently
controlled under the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971.
      In preclinical studies in mice, 5F-AMB-PINACA induced convulsions.
      In a single report of intoxication in humans, in which 5F-AMB-PINACA
was confirmed analytically to be the only drug present, the clinical features were
consistent with those of other synthetic cannabinoids. The features included
bloodshot eyes, cognitive impairment, slowed movement, slurred speech, anxiety
and poor coordination. Memory impairment has also been reported after use of
the drug.

Dependence potential
No controlled experimental studies on the dependence potential of 5F-AMB-
PINACA in animal or human models were available. In view of its action on the
central nervous system as a full CB1 agonist, however, it would be expected to
produce dependence in a manner similar to other synthetic cannabinoids.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
In drug discrimination tests in animals predictive of subjective effects in humans,
5F-AMB-PINACA showed typical cannabinoid-like effects and would therefore
be likely to be abused.
       At least three deaths have been associated with use of 5F-AMB-PINACA,
confirmed by analysis of blood. 5F-AMB-PINACA has been identified as a causal
factor in a number of motor vehicle accidents, some of which resulted in fatalities.
       It has been detected in over 30 countries in different regions and is currently
controlled in several countries.

Therapeutic usefulness
5F-AMB-PINACA is not known to have any therapeutic use.

Recommendation
5F-AMB-PINACA is a synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonist with a mode of
action that suggests the likelihood of abuse and dependence potential similar
to that of other synthetic cannabinoids. Its use has been associated with severe
adverse effects, including death. These effects are similar to those produced
by synthetic cannabinoids that are placed in Schedule II of the Convention on
Psychotropic Substances of 1971. 5F- AMB-PINACA has no therapeutic use.
          ■ Recommendation: The Committee recommended that 5F-AMB-
PINACA (methyl 2-({[1-(5-fluoropentyl)-1H-indazol-3-yl]carbonyl}
amino)-3-methylbutanoate be added to Schedule II of the Convention
on Psychotropic Substances of 1971.

2.1.4 5F-MDMB-PICA
Substance identification
5F-MDMB-PICA (methyl (2S)-2-{[1-(5-fluoropentyl)-1H-indole-3-carbonyl]
amino}-3,3-dimethylbutanoate) is a synthetic cannabinoid also known as
5F-MDMB-2201. It has been detected in plant material intended for smoking
and as a powder.

WHO review history
5F-MDMB-PICA has not been reviewed previously. A critical review was proposed
on the basis of information brought to WHO’s attention that 5F-MDMB-PICA is
manufactured clandestinely, poses a risk to public health and society and is of no
therapeutic use recognized by any Party.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
5F-MDMB-PICA is a full agonist at CB1 and CB2 cannabinoid receptors. It is an
analogue of 5F-MDMB-PINACA, which is listed in Schedule II of the Convention
on Psychotropic Substances of 1971.
       Adverse effects in humans have included impaired mental status, agitated
delirium and seizures; these effects are also produced by other synthetic
cannabinoids.

Dependence potential
No controlled experimental studies of the dependence potential of 5F-MDMB-
PICA have been published. In view of its action on the central nervous system
as a CB1 receptor agonist, however, it is expected to produce dependence in a
manner similar to other synthetic cannabinoids.
      No information was available on the abuse potential of 5F-MDMB-PICA
in animal or human models.
      5F-MDMB-PICA has been identified in seized and collected material and
has been detected in attempted smuggling into prisons. In some countries, it is
one of the most frequently detected synthetic cannabinoids.
      Cases of apparent mass overdose reported in one country were associated
with use of 5F-MDMB-PICA with other synthetic cannabinoids and fentanyl.
5F-MDMB-PICA use has been linked to at least one death.

Therapeutic usefulness
5F-MDMB-PICA is not known to have any therapeutic uses.

Recommendation
5F-MDMB-PICA is a synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonist that is administered
by smoking plant material sprayed with the substance or inhaling vapour after
heating. Its pharmacological mechanism of action suggests the likelihood
of dependence and abuse and ill effects similar to those of other synthetic
cannabinoids. Its use has been associated with substantial harm. Its effects are
similar to those of other synthetic cannabinoids that are placed in Schedule II of
the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971. 5F-MDMB-PICA has no
therapeutic use.
          ■ Recommendation:      The    Committee       recommended     that
5F-MDMB-PICA methyl (2S)-2-{[1-(5-fluoropentyl)-1H-indole-3-
carbonyl]amino}-3,3-dimethylbutanoate be added to Schedule II of
the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971.

2.1.5 4F-MDMB-BINACA
Substance identification
4F-MDMB-BINACA            (methyl     (2S)-2-{[1-(4-fluorobutyl)-1H-indazole-3-
carbonyl]amino}-3,3-dimethylbutanoate) is a synthetic cannabinoid also known
as 4F-MDMB-BUTINACA. It has been detected in powdered form, in liquids
used for vaping and as a constituent of plant mixtures used for smoking.

WHO review history
4F-MDMB-BINACA has not been reviewed previously. A critical review
was proposed on the basis of information brought to WHO’s attention that
4F-MDMB-BINACA is manufactured clandestinely, poses a risk to public health
and society and has no therapeutic use recognized by any Party.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
4F-MDMB-BINACA is an agonist at CB1 receptors. It is an analogue of 5F-ADB
(5F-MDMB-PINACA), which is listed in Schedule II of the Convention on
Psychotropic Substances of 1971. In humans, 4F-MDMB-BINACA produces
central nervous system effects that include paranoia, agitation, confusion and
insomnia. Euphoria, irregular heartbeat, chest pain and vomiting have also been
described.

Dependence potential
No controlled experimental studies of the dependence potential of 4F-MDMB-
BINACA in humans or animals were available. In view of its action on the central
nervous system as a full CB1 agonist, however, 4F-MDMB- BINACA would
be expected to produce dependence in a manner similar to other synthetic
cannabinoids.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
There are no data on the abuse potential of 4F-MDMB-BINACA in animal or
human models.
      Seized and collected specimens of 4F-MDMB-BINACA have been reported
in numerous countries in various regions. In some countries, 4F-MDMB-
BINACA has been detected in cases of attempted smuggling into prisons.
      4F-MDMB-BINACA has been detected in biological specimens from
drug-related fatalities and from cases of impaired driving. It was frequently found
with other psychoactive substances.

Therapeutic usefulness
4F-MDMB-BINACA is not known to have any therapeutic uses.

Recommendation
4F-MDMB-BINACA is a synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonist that is
administered by smoking plant material sprayed with the substance or inhaling
vapour after heating. Its mode of action suggests the likelihood of dependence
and abuse and similar ill effects to other synthetic cannabinoids. Its use has been
associated with a wide range of severe adverse effects, including death. These
effects are similar to those produced by other synthetic cannabinoids that are
placed in Schedule II of the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971.
4F-MDMB-BINACA has no therapeutic use.
          ■ Recommendation:        The     Committee     recommended     that
4F-MDMB-BINACA (methyl (2S)-2-{[1-(4-fluorobutyl)-1H-inda-
zole-3-carbonyl]amino}-3,3-dimethylbutanoate) be added to Sched-
ule II of the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971.

2.2      Synthetic stimulants
2.2.1 4-Chloromethcathinone
Substance identification
4-CMC (4-chloromethcathinone; 1-(4-chlorophenyl)-2-methylamino)propan-
1-one) is a synthetic cathinone also known as clephedrone. It is found in powder
or crystalline form.

WHO review history
4-CMC has not been reviewed previously. A critical review was proposed on the
basis of information brought to WHO’s attention that 4-CMC is manufactured
clandestinely, poses a risk to public health and society and has no therapeutic use
recognized by any Party.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
4-CMC increases extracellular neurotransmitter levels, most notably dopamine,
noradrenaline and serotonin. Its molecular mechanisms and functional properties
are similar to those of other psychostimulants that are listed in Schedule II of the
Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971.
       In humans, the reported effects of 4-CMC include increased concentration,
increased self-confidence and increased sociability. Adverse effects associated
with the use of 4-CMC include hypertension, chest pain, tachycardia, agitation,
fear, aggression, psychoses, hallucinations and sleeplessness. These adverse
effects are similar to those of other psychostimulants such as amphetamine and
3,4-methylenedioxy-methamphetamine (MDMA), as well as other cathinones.

Dependence potential
No controlled experimental studies of the dependence potential of 4-CMC in
animals or humans were available. In view of its action in the central nervous
system, however, 4-CMC would be expected to produce a state of dependence
similar to that of amphetamine and other psychostimulants.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
4-CMC caused time- and dose-dependent increase in locomotor activity in mice.
In drug discrimination assays in animals predictive of subjective effects in humans,
its effects were similar to those of MDMA, cocaine and methamphetamine.
4-CMC also showed rewarding effects in a brain stimulation model that is
predictive of abuse potential.
        4-CMC has been analytically confirmed in biological fluids from cases of
non-fatal and fatal intoxication. In most of these cases, other substances were also
reported.
        This compound has been detected in seized materials and in biological
samples in countries in various regions, including in cases of impaired driving.
It has also been identified in used syringes. Seized materials containing both
4-CMC and MDMA have also been identified. One non-fatal case of intoxication
with 4-CMC alone was reported.

Therapeutic usefulness
4-CMC is not known to have any therapeutic use.

Recommendation
4-CMC (4-chloromethcathinone) is a synthetic cathinone with effects similar
to those of other synthetic cathinones listed as Schedule II substances in the
Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971. Its mode of action and effects
are consistent with those of other cathinones, indicating that it has the potential
for dependence and the likelihood of abuse. There is evidence of use of 4-CMC
in a number of countries in various regions, and its use has resulted in fatal
and non-fatal intoxications. The substance causes substantial harm and has no
therapeutic use.
          ■ Recommendation: The Committee recommended that 4-CMC
(1-(4-chlorophenyl)-2-methylamino)propan-1-one) be added to
Schedule II of the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances.

2.2.2 N-Ethylhexedrone
Substance identification
N-Ethylhexedrone (2-(ethylamino)-1-phenylhexan-1-one) is a synthetic
cathinone also known as NEH and hexen. Although originally synthesized and
described as a potential anorexigenic agent, N-ethylhexedrone has appeared as a
new psychoactive substance on global markets only since 2016.

WHO review history
N-Ethylhexedrone has not been reviewed previously. A critical review was
proposed on the basis of information brought to WHO’s attention that
N-ethylhexedrone is manufactured clandestinely, poses a risk to public health
and society and has no therapeutic use recognized by any Party.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Similar to other psychostimulants, such as other synthetic cathinones,
N-ethylhexedrone increases extracellular concentrations of the neurotransmitters
dopamine and noradrenaline. N-Ethylhexedrone is structurally similar to
pentedrone, which is listed in Schedule II of the Convention on Psychotropic
Substances of 1971.
       Human users of N-ethylhexedrone describe psychostimulant effects such
as euphoria, empathy, an enhanced sense of well-being, increased talkativeness,
sociability, insomnia, increased creativity, increased libido, increased
concentration and sensory enhancement. Also, like other psychostimulants,
rebound effects such as fatigue, depressive states, anxiety, irritability and insomnia
are reported to occur after the initial effects of the drug.
       Observation of hospital admissions due to intoxication and users’ reports
indicate that the adverse effects of N-ethylhexedrone include hypertension,
tremors, convulsions, chest pains, tachycardia, dysrhythmia, limb numbness and
elevated temperature. These effects are similar to those of other psychostimulants.

Dependence potential
No controlled experimental studies of the dependence potential of
N-ethylhexedrone have been reported in animals or humans. In view of its
action on the central nervous system, however, N-ethylhexedrone would be
expected to produce a state of dependence similar to amphetamine and other
psychostimulants.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
In drug discrimination tests in animals that are predictive of subjective effects in
humans, N-ethylhexedrone had methamphetamine- and cocaine-like effects that
suggest similar abuse liability.
       N-Ethylhexedrone has been detected in biological fluids collected from
several cases of non-fatal intoxication as well as one fatality. In some of these
cases, N-ethylhexedrone was the only drug detected.
       A number of countries in various regions have reported use or detection of
the compound in seized materials, including in used syringes.

Therapeutic usefulness
N-Ethylhexedrone is not known to have any therapeutic use.

Recommendation
N-Ethylhexedrone (2-(ethylamino)-1-phenylhexan-1-one) is a synthetic
cathinone with effects similar to those of other synthetic cathinones that are
listed as Schedule II substances in the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of
1971. Its mode of action and effects are consistent with those of other cathinones,
indicating that it has the potential for dependence and likelihood of abuse. There
is evidence that use of N-ethylhexedrone in a number of countries in various
regions has resulted in cases of fatal and non-fatal intoxication. The substance
causes substantial harm and has no therapeutic use.
          ■ Recommendation: The Committee recommended that N-ethylhexe-
drone(2-(ethylamino)-1-phenylhexan-1-one) be added to Schedule
II of the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances.

2.2.3 Alpha-PHP
Substance identification
Alpha-PHP (alpha-pyrrolidinohexanophone; 1-phenyl-2-(pyrrolidine-1-yl)
hexan-1-one) is a synthetic cathinone that was developed and patented in 1967
but never marketed. In its pure form, alpha-PHP is usually a crystalline solid or
powder.

WHO review history
Alpha-PHP has not been reviewed previously. A critical review was proposed
on the basis of information brought to WHO’s attention that alpha-PHP is
manufactured clandestinely, poses a risk to public health and society and has no
therapeutic use recognized by any Party.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Alpha-PHP enhances the activity of the neurotransmitter dopamine by blocking
re-uptake. It has a similar but lesser effect on the neurotransmitter noradrenaline.
It shares similar molecular mechanisms and functional properties with other
psychostimulants that are currently controlled under the Convention on
Psychotropic Substances of 1971.
       In humans, alpha-PHP causes central nervous system stimulation similar
to other psychostimulants, with effects such as tremor, sweating, psychosis,
paranoia, hallucinations, agitation, anxiety, hypertension, tachycardia, seizures
and unconsciousness. Other reported adverse effects include depressed mood,
irritability, headache, insomnia and nausea. Consistent with the effects of
other psychostimulants, alpha-PHP is an anorexic, has reinforcing properties
and induces craving. Because of its extended half-life, long-lasting psychotic
symptoms have been reported. Users report a range of effects that are consistent
with the stimulant activity of the drug.

Dependence potential
No controlled experimental studies of the dependence potential of alpha-PHP in
humans or animal models have been reported. Its mechanism of action, particularly
the effect on dopamine, suggests, however, that it is highly likely to produce a
state of dependence similar to amphetamine and other psychostimulants.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
In drug discrimination tests in animals, alpha-PHP was readily self-administered,
with greater reinforcing effects than some other cathinones, suggesting that
it has high abuse liability. In drug discrimination assays in animals predictive
of subjective effects in humans, alpha-PHP showed effects similar to those of
cocaine and methamphetamine.
       Alpha-PHP has been identified on the illicit drug market, and hundreds of
seizures have been reported.
       In reports of fatal and non-fatal intoxications, alpha-PHP has been detected
in biological fluids, sometimes as the only drug present or as the drug that made
the most significant contribution to the person’s condition.

Therapeutic usefulness
alpha-PHP is not known to have any therapeutic use.

Recommendation
Alpha-PHP (1-phenyl-2-(pyrrolidine-1-yl)hexan-1-one; also known as alpha-
pyrrolidinohexanophenone), is a synthetic cathinone with effects similar to those
of other synthetic cathinones and of other psychostimulants such as amphetamine,
that are listed under Schedule II of the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of
1971. Through its mechanism of action and effects, alpha-PHP can stimulate the
central nervous system and produce a state of dependence. There is evidence that
its abuse constitutes a public health and social problem. It has no therapeutic use.
          ■ Recommendation: The Committee recommended that alpha-PHP
(1-phenyl-2-(pyrrolidine -1-yl) hexan-1-one) be added to Schedule
II of the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances.

2.3       Hallucinogen
2.3.1 DOC (2,5-Dimethoxy-4-chloroamfetamine)
Substance identification
DOC (1-(4-chloro-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)propan-2-amine) is a synthetic
hallucinogen also known as 2,5-dimethoxy-4-chloroamphetamine. It is
commonly found in the form of impregnated blotting paper as well as a powder,
liquid and tablets.

WHO review history
DOC has not been reviewed previously. A critical review was proposed on the
basis of information brought to WHO’s attention that DOC is manufactured
clandestinely, poses a risk to public health and society and has no therapeutic use
recognized by any Party.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
DOC is a hallucinogen with actions on the central nervous system mediated
predominantly through receptors of the neurotransmitter serotonin. DOC is an
analogue of 2,5-dimethoxy-4-bromoamphetamine (DOB) and 2,5-dimethoxy-4-
methylamphetamine (DOM), hallucinogenic amphetamine derivatives that are
listed in Schedule I of the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971. Its
actions on the nervous system and effects in animals and humans are comparable
to those of the hallucinogenic amphetamines DOB, DOM and 2,5-dimethoxy-
4-iodoamphetamine (DOI). DOC also has actions and effects similar to those of
the hallucinogens lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), psilocybin, mescaline and
N,N-dimethyltryptamine. The effects in humans included tonic–clonic seizures,
agitation, hyperthermia, aggression and visual hallucinations.
       DOC has a long duration of action and the hallucinatory effects have been
reported to last 12–24 h.

Dependence potential
No controlled experimental studies of the dependence potential of DOC in
humans or animals have been reported. Like other serotonergic hallucinogens
such as LSD and psilocybin, however, use of DOC is unlikely to result in
dependence.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
In animals, DOC had rewarding effects and depressed locomotor activity.
In drug discrimination assays in animals predictive of subjective effects in
humans, DOC had effects similar to those of the hallucinogens LSD and N,N-
dimethyltryptamine (DMT), but much less similar to those of the stimulants
MDMA and methamphetamine.
       No studies of the likelihood of abuse of DOC in humans were identified.
A number of countries in different regions have reported seizure and collection
of specimens of DOC.
       DOC is sold on the Internet, commonly misrepresented as LSD. DOC has
been detected in cases of intoxication, often with other substances. At least one
death has been attributed to use of DOC.

Therapeutic usefulness
DOC is not known to have any therapeutic use.

Recommendation
DOC (1-(4-chloro-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)propan-2-amine)) is a hallucinogenic
amphetamine derivative with effects similar to those of other hallucinogenic
amphetamines such as DOM and DOB, which are controlled in Schedule I of
the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances. Its mode of action and effects
indicate the likelihood of abuse. DOC has been associated with a number of non-
fatal cases of intoxication and at least one fatal case. It has no therapeutic use, and
its use constitutes an especially serious risk to public health.
          ■ Recommendation: The Committee recommended that DOC
(1-(4-chloro-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)propan-2-amine)) be added to
Schedule I of the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances.

2.4      Fentanyl analogues
2.4.1 Crotonylfentanyl
Substance identification
Crotonylfentanyl (E-N-(1-phenylethylpiperidin-4-yl)-N-phenylbut-2-enamide)
is a synthetic analogue of the opioid fentanyl and a structural isomer of
cyclopropylfentanyl, both of which are controlled under Schedule I of the 1961
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs. It is found in powder and tablet forms.

WHO review history
Crotonylfentanyl has not been reviewed previously. A critical review was proposed
on the basis of information brought to WHO’s attention that crotonylfentanyl is
manufactured clandestinely, poses a risk to public health and society and has no
therapeutic use recognized by any Party.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Crotonylfentanyl is a µ-opioid receptor agonist that is more potent than
oxycodone and morphine but less potent than fentanyl. In view of its mechanism
of action, it would be expected to produce the typical range of opioid effects,
including analgesia, respiratory depression and sedation. In animals, it produces
antinociceptive effects, which are blocked by the opioid antagonist naltrexone,
and changes in locomotor activity.
       Consistent with its µ-opioid agonist effect, the effects of crotonylfentanyl
were reversed by an opioid antagonist in a clinical case of intoxication.

Dependence potential
No controlled experiments of the dependence potential of crotonylfentanyl were
available. In view of its mechanism of action, however, crotonylfentanyl would be
expected to produce dependence similar to other opioid drugs.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
In drug discrimination assays in animals predictive of subjective effects in
humans, crotonylfentanyl fully substituted for oxycodone and would therefore
be likely to be abused.
       In humans, the abuse potential of crotonylfentanyl has not been evaluated;
however, the drug has been found in seized materials either alone or in
combination with cyclopropylfentanyl.

Therapeutic usefulness
Crotonylfentanyl is not known to have any therapeutic use.

Recommendation
The available evidence indicates that crotonylfentanyl has opioid actions and effects
that are similar to those of other opioid agonists such as cyclopropylfentanyl and
fentanyl, which are controlled under Schedule I of the 1961 Single Convention on
Narcotic Drugs. Crotonylfentanyl has no known therapeutic use and could cause
substantial harm.
          ■ Recommendation:      The    Committee        recommended      that
crotonylfentanyl (E-N-(1-phenylethylpiperidin-4-yl)-N-phenylbut-
2-enamide) be added to Schedule I of the 1961 Single Convention on
Narcotic Drugs.

2.4.2 Valerylfentanyl
Substance identification
Valerylfentanyl (N-(1-phenethylpideridin-4-yl)-N-phenylpentanamide) is a
synthetic analogue of the opioid fentanyl that is also known as pentanoylfentanyl,
pentanyl fentanyl and phenylvaleramide. It has been found in powder and tablet
forms.

WHO review history
Valerylfentanyl has not been reviewed previously. A direct critical review
was proposed on the basis of information brought to WHO’s attention that
valerylfentanyl is manufactured clandestinely, poses a risk to public health and
society and has no therapeutic use recognized by any Party.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Valerylfentanyl is a µ-opioid receptor agonist that is less potent than fentanyl. In
view of this mechanism of action, it would be expected to produce the typical
range of opioid effects, including analgesia, respiratory depression and sedation.
       In a drug discrimination assay in animals predictive of subjective effects in
humans, valerylfentanyl produced oxycodone-like effects. It also produces typical
opioid effects, such as antinociception, suppresses opioid withdrawal and would
therefore be likely to be abused. Both the antinociceptive and discriminative
effects were blocked by an opioid antagonist.

Dependence potential
Studies demonstrating the ability of valerylfentanyl to suppress withdrawal in
morphine-dependent monkeys suggest that it can produce physical dependence
similar to other opioids. No controlled experimental studies pertinent to the
dependence potential of valerylfentanyl in humans have been reported.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
In drug discrimination tests in animals predictive of subjective effects in humans,
valerylfentanyl produced oxycodone-like effects and would therefore be likely to
be abused.
       Seized materials containing valerylfentanyl have been reported in a few
countries in several regions. Use of valerylfentanyl has been associated with several
documented deaths. Cases of driving under the influence of valerylfentanyl have
also been documented.

Therapeutic usefulness
Valerylfentanyl is not known to have any therapeutic use.

Recommendation
The available evidence indicates that valerylfentanyl has opioid actions and
effects very similar to those of other opioid agonists such as oxycodone and
morphine, which are controlled under Schedule I of the 1961 Single Convention
on Narcotic Drugs. Valerylfentanyl has no known therapeutic use and could
produce substantial harm, including death.
          ■ Recommendation: The Committee recommended that valerylfentanyl
(N-(1-phenethylpideridin-4-yl)-N-phenylpentanamide) be added to
Schedule I of the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs.

2.5      Benzodiazepines
2.5.1 Flualprazolam
Substance identification
Flualprazolam (8-chloro-6-(2-fluorophenyl)-1-methyl-4H-[1,2,4]triazolo[4,3-
a][1,4]benzodiazepine) is a triazolo-benzodiazepine. Flualprazolam has been
detected in seized samples of tablets and, more rarely, powder, blotters and liquid.
It was the subject of a patent but has never been marketed as a pharmaceutical.

WHO review history
Flualprazolam has not been reviewed previously. A direct critical review
was proposed on the basis of information brought to WHO’s attention that
flualprazolam poses a risk to public health and society and has no therapeutic
use recognized by any Party.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Flualprazolam is an agonist at the benzodiazepine site of the gamma-aminobutyric
acid (GABAA) receptor. Its pharmacological effects are similar to those of other
benzodiazepines, such as alprazolam, which is currently controlled under the
Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971.
      User reports have indicated that flualprazolam depresses central nervous
system function, with effects such as sedation, loss of memory and disinhibition,
similar to other benzodiazepines.

Dependence potential
No studies on the dependence potential of flualprazolam in humans or animals
were available. In view of its mechanism of action, however, flualprazolam would
be expected to produce dependence similar to other benzodiazepines, particularly
the closely related alprazolam.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
No studies on the abuse potential of flualprazolam in humans or animals were
available. Flualprazolam has a fast onset of action, which would suggest that it
would have a high abuse liability, similar to that of alprazolam.
       Users reported that flualprazolam reduces anxiety and causes sedation,
suggesting that it has significant abuse potential.
       A number of countries in various regions have reported detection of
flualprazolam in fatal and non-fatal intoxications and in cases of impaired
driving. Over 25 deaths occurred after confirmed exposure to flualprazolam.

Therapeutic usefulness
Flualprazolam is not known to have any therapeutic uses.

Recommendation
Flualprazolam (8-chloro-6-(2-fluorophenyl)-1-methyl-4H-[1,2,4]triazolo[4,3-
a][1,4]benzodiazepine) is a benzodiazepine that is chemically similar to the
benzodiazepines alprazolam and triazolam, which are listed under Schedule
IV of the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances. In common with other
benzodiazepines, flualprazolam can produce a state of dependence as well as
central nervous system depression. There is sufficient evidence that it is being
abused and therefore constitutes a public health and social problem. It has no
therapeutic use.
          ■ Recommendation: The Committee recommended that flualprazolam
be added to Schedule IV of the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic
Substances.

2.5.2 Etizolam
Substance identification
Etizolam            (4-(2-chlorophenyl)-2-ethyl-9-methyl-6H-thieno[3,2f][1,2,4]
triazolo[4,3-a][1,4]diazepine) is a thienodiazepine derivative. It is used as a
pharmaceutical for treatment of anxiety in some countries, but is also produced
as an unapproved drug in tablet and powder forms.

WHO review history
The ECDD reviewed etizolam at its 26th meeting, in 1989, and at its 27th meeting,
in 1990. At its 37th meeting, in 2015, the Committee pre-reviewed etizolam
and recommended that a critical review be conducted at a future meeting. A
critical review of etizolam was prepared for the 39th meeting, in 2017. At that
meeting, the Committee noted that there were insufficient data on dependence,
abuse and risks to public health posed and therefore recommended that it be kept
under surveillance. A critical review was initiated at the 42nd meeting, as new
information had been presented to the Committee on dependence, abuse and
risks to public health.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Etizolam is an agonist at the benzodiazepine site of the GABAA receptor. Its
pharmacological effects are similar to those of other benzodiazepines such as
diazepam, which is currently controlled under the Convention on Psychotropic
Substances of 1971.
       In animal models, etizolam induced effects characteristic of
benzodiazepines, such as muscle relaxation, anticonvulsive effects and sedation.
       Central nervous system depression has also been described in humans.
The effects, which include drowsiness, sedation, muscle relaxation, ataxia, slurred
speech and loss of consciousness, are reversed by the benzodiazepine receptor
antagonist flumazenil.

Dependence potential
The dependence potential of etizolam in humans has been described in case
reports and on drug information forums. Non-medical use is associated with
the development of tolerance as well as craving and withdrawal on cessation of
use. The withdrawal symptoms described in a case report were characteristic of
benzodiazepine withdrawal and included palpitations, impaired sleep, agitation
and tremors.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
In the animal drug discrimination model, etizolam showed pentobarbital-like
effects, suggesting that it may have subjective drug effects similar to those of
sedative hypnotics.
       Non-medical use of etizolam has been documented in a number of
countries. It has been detected in impaired drivers and in biological samples from
cases of fatal drug overdose, often in combination with other substances. In one
country, it was reported to contribute to up to 46% of all drug-related deaths.

Therapeutic usefulness
Etizolam was patented in the 1970s and has been marketed since the early 1980s.
It is not on the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines or the WHO Model List
of Essential Medicines for Children, but it is sold commercially as a medicine in
a few countries. Etizolam is also sold by several companies for research purposes.
It has been used for the treatment of anxiety disorders and other psychiatric
conditions.

Recommendation
Etizolam      (4-(2-chlorophenyl)-2-ethyl-9-methyl-6H-thieno[3,2-         f][1,2,4]
triazolo[4,3a][1,4]diazepine) is a thienodiazepine derivative that has actions
and effects very similar to those of benzodiazepines listed under Schedule IV
in the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971. It can produce a state of
dependence and central nervous system depression, like other benzodiazepines.
It has therapeutic indications and has marketing authorization in a few countries.
There is sufficient evidence of its abuse so as to constitute a public health and
social problem.
          ■ Recommendation: The Committee recommended that etizolam
(4-(2-chlorophenyl)-2-ethyl-9-methyl-6H-thieno[3,2-        f][1,2,4]
triazolo[4,3a][1,4]diazepine ) be added to Schedule IV of the 1971
Convention on Psychotropic Substances.
