
2.2.1 4F-MDMB-BICA (4F-MDMB-BUTICA)
Substance identification
The chemical structure of 4F-MDMB-BICA (IUPAC chemical name: Methyl
2-({[1-(4-fluorobutyl)-1H-indol-3-yl]carbonyl}amino)-3,3-dimethylbutanoate)
is similar to those of a number of synthetic cannabinoids. It has been identified
in seized materials as a white, off-white, brown or orange powder and has been
identified in herbal blends, vaping solutions and infused onto paper. It is also
available as a reference material as a crystalline solid.

WHO review history
4F-MDMB-BICA has not been formally reviewed by WHO and is not currently
under international control. Information was brought to WHO’s attention that
this substance is manufactured clandestinely, poses a risk to public health and has
no recognized therapeutic use.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
4F-MDMB-BICA is a synthetic cannabinoid, structurally related to 5F-MDMB-
PICA, a synthetic cannabinoid that is included in Schedule II of the United
Nations Single Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971. Some data
suggest that 4F-MDMB-BICA has activity at the cannabinoid (CB1) receptor, but
this action may not be identical to that exerted by other CB1 agonists. The effects
of 4F-MDMB-BICA have not been evaluated in animals or humans, and there
are insufficient data on overdose cases to confirm that it has typical cannabinoid
effects.

Dependence potential
No studies have been reported in animals or humans on the dependence potential
of 4F-MDMB-BICA.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
No studies have been reported in animals or humans to indicate the likelihood
of abuse of 4F-MDMB-BICA. A number of countries in various regions have
reported use of 4F-MDMB-BICA. Its use has been associated with deaths
and emergency department visits, although many substances were present in
biological samples, and the relationship between 4F-MDMB-BICA exposure and
cause of death was not established.

Therapeutic usefulness
4F-MDMB-BICA is not known to have any therapeutic use.

Recommendation
The structure of 4F-MDMB-BICA is similar to those of other synthetic
cannabinoids, but its mechanism of action has yet to be confirmed. The magnitude
of harm due to 4F-MDMB-BICA alone is unclear, and its effects and abuse
potential have not been studied in animals or humans. In view of the limited
information available on abuse, dependence and risks to public health, there is
insufficient evidence to justify placing 4F-MDMB-BICA under international
control.
    Recommendation: The Committee recommended that 4F-MDMB-BICA
(IUPAC chemical name: Methyl 2-({[1-(4-fluorobutyl)-1H-indol-3-yl]carbonyl}
amino)-3,3-dimethylbutanoate) be kept under surveillance by the WHO
secretariat.

2.2.2 Brorphine
Substance identification
The chemical structure of brorphine (IUPAC chemical name: 3- {1- [1-
(4-bromophenyl) ethyl] piperidin-4-yl} -1H-benzimidazol-2-one) is similar
to that of bezitramide, an opioid listed in Schedule I of the 1961 Convention.
Brorphine free base has been described as a white or off-white solid and the
hydrochloride salt as a neat solid, with seized samples described as white,
yellowish, grey, purple or white powder or in crystal form. It is also found in
tablets and capsules as falsified opioid medicines. It is reported to be used by oral,
inhalation and intravenous (iv) routes of administration.

WHO review history
Brorphine has not been formally reviewed by WHO and is not currently under
international control. Information was brought to WHO’s attention that this
substance is manufactured clandestinely, poses a risk to public health and is of no
recognized therapeutic use.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Brorphine is a full agonist at the μ-opioid receptor (MOR), with greater potency
than morphine and less potency than fentanyl. It has analgesic effects that are
reversed by an opioid antagonist and, based on its mechanism of action, it would
be expected to produce other typical opioid effects such as respiratory depression
and sedation. Brorphine may be convertible to bezitramide, which is an opioid
listed in Schedule I of the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs.

Dependence potential
No controlled studies in animals or humans have examined the dependence
potential of brorphine. As a potent µ-opioid agonist, it would be expected to
produce dependence similar to other opioid substances. Unverified online
reports describe tolerance and withdrawal after repeated brorphine use.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
In an animal model for predicting abuse potential, brorphine had effects similar
to those of morphine and fentanyl.
    Deaths involving brorphine have been reported in several countries. Deaths
commonly occur after use of brorphine in combination with other opioids or with
benzodiazepines such as flualprazolam. Brorphine has been identified in falsified
opioid medicines, suggesting that its use may sometimes be unintentional. Fatal
and non-fatal intoxications due to brorphine share features with intoxications
due to other opioids, such as pulmonary oedema. Brorphine has been detected
with other substances in biological fluids in cases of driving under the influence
of drugs (DUID).
    Seizures have been reported in multiple countries and regions.

Therapeutic usefulness
Brorphine is not known to have any therapeutic use.

Recommendation
The mechanism of action of brorphine indicates that it is likely to have similar
abuse potential and ill effects as opioids that are controlled under Schedule I
of the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs. Its use has been reported in
a number of countries and has been associated with adverse effects, including
death. It has no known therapeutic use and is likely to cause substantial harm.
     Recommendation: The Committee recommended that brorphine
(IUPAC chemical name: 3- {1- [1- (4-bromophenyl) ethyl] piperidin-4-yl}
-1H-benzimidazol-2-one) be added to Schedule I of the 1961 Single Convention
on Narcotic Drugs.

2.2.3 Metonitazene
Substance identification
Metonitazene (IUPAC chemical name: N,N-diethyl-2-(2-(4-methoxybenzyl)-
5-nitro-1H-benzo[d]imidazol-1-yl)ethan-1-amine) belongs to the series of
2-benzylbenzimidazole opioid compounds. It is a white, off-white, beige or
coloured powder and is sometimes crystalline. Reports suggest that it is used
intranasally and by iv injection.

WHO review history
Metonitazene has not been formally reviewed by WHO and is not currently
under international control. Information was brought to WHO’s attention that
this substance is manufactured clandestinely, poses a risk to public health and has
no recognized therapeutic use.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Metonitazene is a chemical analogue of etonitazene and isotonitazene, both
of which are Schedule I compounds under the Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs, 1961. Metonitazene is a potent opioid analgesic with rapid onset of action
and greater potency than fentanyl and hydromorphone. Limited early clinical
research demonstrated that metonitazene produces analgesia and typical opioid
adverse effects, including sedation, respiratory depression, nausea and vomiting.
The effects of metonitazene have been shown to be reversed by an opioid
antagonist.

Dependence potential
Studies in animals show that metonitazene suppresses opioid withdrawal and has
potent µ-opioid agonist effects. No controlled human studies have been reported
on the dependence potential of metonitazene, but, as it is a potent µ-opioid
agonist, it would be expected to produce dependence similarly to other opioids.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
No controlled studies have been reported on the abuse potential of metonitazene,
but, as it is a potent µ-opioid agonist, it would be expected to have high abuse
liability. Online reports by people who have used metonitazene describe its
euphoric and opioid-like effects.
     A number of deaths have been reported in association with use of
metonitazene. In many of these cases, metonitazene was used in combination
with other opioids or benzodiazepines; however, in some fatalities, metonitazene
was the sole substance identified in analysed biological samples.
     Trafficking and use of metonitazene have been reported from a number of
countries in several regions.

Therapeutic usefulness
Metonitazene is not known to have any therapeutic use.

Recommendation
The mechanism of action and effects of metonitazene indicate that it is liable to
have abuse potential and ill effects similar to those of opioids that are controlled
under Schedule I of the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs. Its use has
been reported in a number of countries and been associated with adverse effects,
including death. Metonitazene has no known therapeutic use and is likely to
cause substantial harm.
    Recommendation: The Committee recommended that metonitazene
(IUPAC chemical name: N,N-diethyl-2-(2-(4-methoxybenzyl)-5-nitro-1H-
benzo[d]imidazol-1-yl)ethan-1-amine) be added to Schedule I of the 1961 Single
Convention on Narcotic Drugs.

2.2.4 Eutylone (3,4-methylenedioxy-α-ethylamino butiophenone)
Substance identification
Eutylone (IUPAC chemical name: 1-(Benzo[d][1,3]dioxol-5-yl)-2-(ethylamino)
butan-1-one) is a synthetic cathinone of the phenethylamine class. The
hydrochloride salt of eutylone has been described as a crystalline solid. Eutylone
is found mainly as tablets, capsules and crystals. It is used orally and intranasally.

WHO review history
Eutylone has not been formally reviewed by WHO and is not currently under
international control. Information was brought to WHO’s attention that this
substance is manufactured clandestinely, poses a risk to public health and has no
recognized therapeutic use.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Eutylone is a synthetic cathinone with a mechanism of action and effects
similar to those of other cathinones and stimulants such as methamphetamine.
Related cathinones, such as methylone and N-ethylnorpentylone, are listed
under Schedule II of the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971. The
clinical features described are similar to those with other cathinones, including
sympathomimetic effects and psychostimulant effects such as euphoria, insomnia,
tachycardia, agitation, anxiety, delirium and psychosis.

Dependence potential
No studies have been conducted in animals or humans on the dependence
potential of eutylone. In view of its overall profile of effects, eutylone would be
expected to produce dependence similarly to other psychostimulants.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
In an animal model that predicts abuse potential, eutylone was shown to produce
effects similar to those of methamphetamine. Online reports from people
reporting use of eutylone suggest that it has high abuse potential.
     Eutylone has been detected in biological samples from forensic, post-mortem
and DUID cases. Published case reports describe fatalities as a result of eutylone
use. In addition to the effects described above, reported adverse events in these
cases have included rhabdomyolysis, hyperthermia, hypertension and seizures.
    Eutylone has been detected in seized materials in multiple countries in
several regions.

Therapeutic usefulness
Eutylone is not known to have any therapeutic use.

Recommendation
Eutylone has effects similar to those of related cathinones listed under Schedule
II of the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971.
     There is evidence that this substance is used in multiple countries in various
regions. Eutylone causes substantial harm, including severe adverse events and
fatal intoxications. Its mode of action suggests the likelihood of abuse, and it
poses a substantial risk to public health. It has no known therapeutic use.
     Recommendation: The Committee recommended that eutylone (IUPAC
chemical name: 1-(benzo[d][1,3]dioxol-5-yl)-2-(ethylamino)butan-1-one) be
added to Schedule II of the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971.

2.2.5 Benzylone (3,4-methylenedioxy-N-benzylcathinone)
Substance identification
Benzylone (IUPAC chemical name: 1-(benzo[d][1,3]dioxol-5-yl)-2-
(benzylamino)propan-1-one) is a ring-substituted synthetic cathinone.
Benzylone is a white powder, and the hydrochloride salt is a crystalline solid.

WHO review history
Benzylone has not been formally reviewed by WHO and is not currently under
international control. Information was brought to WHO’s attention that this
substance is manufactured clandestinely, poses a risk to public health and has no
recognized therapeutic use.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
The mode of action of benzylone suggests stimulant effects similar to those of
other cathinones; however, these effects are relatively weak, and it did not produce
stimulant effects in animal models.
    Limited information is available on its effects in humans.

Dependence potential
No information was available on the dependence potential of benzylone in
animals or humans.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
In an animal model that predicts abuse potential, benzylone did not produce
effects similar to those of 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA),
and its similarity to methamphetamine is unclear. No human studies have been
conducted to assess abuse liability.
     Benzylone has been detected in seized materials in multiple countries across
several regions.
     Little information was available on the adverse effects of benzylone. Although
it has been detected in post-mortem samples with other substances, there is no
evidence that benzylone had a causative role in the deaths.

Therapeutic usefulness
Benzylone is not known to have any therapeutic use.

Recommendation
Benzylone is a synthetic cathinone that has some effects in common with
substances listed under Schedule II of the Convention on Psychotropic Substances
of 1971. However, its effects are relatively weak and there is no consistent
evidence supporting the likelihood of abuse or dependence. In addition, there is
no consistent evidence of the extent of public health and social problems related
to use of benzylone.
    Recommendation: The Committee recommended that benzylone (IUPAC
chemical name: 1-(Benzo[d][1,3]dioxol-5-yl)-2-(benzylamino)propan-1-one)
be kept under surveillance by the WHO secretariat.

2.3.1 Kratom, mitragynine, 7-hydroxymitragynine
Substance identification
Kratom is the common term for Mitragyna speciosa, a tree native to South-East
Asia. Kratom is used almost exclusively orally, typically by chewing the leaves,
ingesting powdered leaf, drinking an infusion or decoction or by ingesting
powdered leaf as a capsule or pill or dissolved in a beverage. Other forms such as
extracts and resins are also used.
    Several alkaloids have been detected in kratom plants. The main known
psychoactive components are mitragynine and 7-hydroxymitragynine, both of
which are found in the leaves of M. speciosa. Mitragynine is the most abundant
alkaloid in kratom. While 7-hydroxymitragynine is a minor alkaloid, it is also a
metabolite of mitragynine.

WHO review history
Kratom has been under ECDD surveillance since 2020, when a national report
indicated the potential for abuse, dependence and harm to public health from
mitragynine and 7-hydroxymitragynine, and a report from an international
organization documented fatalities associated with kratom use. A pre-review on
kratom, mitragynine and 7-hydroxymitragynine was initiated after consideration
of those reports.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Mitragynine and 7-hydroxymitragynine are partial agonists at the µ-opioid
receptor. The analgesic effects of kratom have been demonstrated in humans,
while kratom extract, mitragynine and 7-hydroxymitragynine have been shown
to be antinociceptive in animal models. The antinociceptive effects are reversed
by an opioid antagonist.
    Mitragynine also binds to adrenergic, serotonergic and dopamine receptors.
Although there is limited information on its effects at these receptors, kratom
extracts and mitragynine have been reported to have a variety of non-opioid-like
behavioural effects in animals, including antidepressant and antipsychotic effects.
    Reported adverse effects after kratom intoxication have included
neuropsychiatric (agitation, confusion, sedation, hallucinations, tremor, seizure,
coma), cardiovascular (tachycardia, hypertension), gastrointestinal (abdominal
pain, nausea, vomiting) and respiratory (respiratory depression) symptoms. A
number of cases of kratom-associated liver toxicity have been documented.

Dependence potential
In animal models, repeated dosing with mitragynine produced dependence,
evidenced by naloxone-precipitated withdrawal. The withdrawal syndrome from
kratom appeared to be less severe than that from morphine.
    In humans, opioid-like withdrawal symptoms have been reported after
cessation of kratom use. Limited epidemiological evidence indicates that
withdrawal is usually mild. A few cases of neonatal opioid withdrawal symptoms
have been reported in neonates born to mothers who used kratom regularly.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
Kratom extracts did not show abuse liability in one animal model. Mitragynine
and 7-hydroxymitragynine had effects indicative of abuse liability in some animal
models but not in others. Mitragynine is not self-administered by animals, while
7-hydroxymitragynine has been shown to be self-administered, supporting likely
abuse liability.
     Kratom can produce serious toxicity in people who use high doses, but the
number of cases is probably low as a proportion of the total number of people who
use kratom. Although mitragynine has been analytically confirmed in a number
of deaths, almost all involved use of other substances, and the contribution of
kratom use to the fatalities is unclear.
     Kratom and mitragynine have been associated with cases of DUID, but their
role in driving impairment could not be established in most instances.
     Multiple countries across various regions report nonmedical use of kratom.
Seizures of kratom and related products have been reported in several countries.

Therapeutic usefulness
People report using kratom to self-medicate for a variety of disorders and
conditions, including pain, opioid withdrawal, opioid use disorder, anxiety and
depression. Kratom is used in traditional medicine in some countries.
    Research is under way to determine the basic pharmacology and potential
therapeutic value of kratom, mitragynine and 7-hydroxymitragynine.

Recommendation
Kratom contains multiple alkaloids. The two main known psychoactive alkaloids,
mitragynine and 7-hydroxymitragynine, have at least some effects similar to
those of opioids under international control. Mitragynine, the most abundant of
these alkaloids, also has non-opioid activity, the significance of which is unclear.
There is mixed evidence on the abuse liability of mitragynine in animal models.
Kratom is used for self-medication for a variety of disorders but there is limited
evidence of abuse liability in humans. Cessation of regular use of kratom may
lead to withdrawal symptoms.
     The Committee considered information on traditional use and investigation
into possible medical applications of kratom.
     The Committee concluded that there is insufficient evidence to recommend a
critical review of kratom. With respect to mitragynine and 7-hydroxymitragynine,
the Committee, except for one member, also concluded that there is insufficient
evidence to recommend a critical review at this time.
     Recommendation: The Committee recommended that kratom, mitragynine
and 7-hydroxymitragynine be kept under surveillance by the WHO secretariat.

2.3.2 Phenibut (4-amino-3-phenyl-butyric acid)
Substance identification
Phenibut (IUPAC chemical name: 4-amino-3-phenylbutanoic acid) is a structural
analogue of baclofen and gabapentin. It is produced in various formulations,
including tablets and powder for oral use and a crystalline form. Phenibut is a
registered pharmaceutical in some countries and is also marketed online for a
number of uses, including as a sleep aid, mood enhancer, treatment for anxiety
and a cognitive enhancer.

WHO review history
Phenibut has not been formally reviewed by WHO and is not currently under
international control. Phenibut has been under ECDD surveillance since 2017
after reports from Member States of its abuse and dependence potential. A pre-
review was initiated after consideration of those reports.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Phenibut acts primarily as an agonist at the γ-aminobutyric acid (GABAB)
receptor, similar to baclofen, and at the α2–δ subunit of voltage-dependent
calcium channels, similar to gabapentin.
     In animal studies, phenibut has dose-dependent analgesic, antidepressant
and anxiolytic effects, which are mediated both by its GABAB agonist effects and
actions at voltage-dependent calcium channels.
     Phenibut intoxication can result in central nervous system depressive
symptoms, including decreased level of consciousness, muscle tone, stupor,
depressed respiration, temperature dysregulation, hyper- or hypotension and
coma. Other individuals have presented with agitation, hallucinations, seizures
and delirium.

Dependence potential
No studies have been conducted in animals on the dependence potential of
phenibut. People who use phenibut describe escalating dosing, suggesting
tolerance, and difficulty in cessation.
     There have been a few case reports of withdrawal symptoms after abrupt
discontinuation of high doses of phenibut. The reported symptoms included
insomnia, psychomotor agitation, delusions, psychosis, disorganized thought
patterns, auditory/visual hallucinations, anxiety, depression, fatigue, dizziness,
seizures, decreased appetite, nausea and vomiting, palpitations and tachycardia.
In most cases, use of phenibut was not verified analytically, and the clinical
picture was complicated by use of other drugs.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
No controlled studies in animals or humans have examined the abuse potential
of phenibut.
     Adverse effects due to nonmedical use of phenibut have been reported from
different countries. The doses taken in medically unsupervised use of phenibut
obtained on the Internet are often much higher than those used clinically;
however, many cases involve multiple drugs and the role of phenibut in these
cases remains unclear.
    Multiple countries over several regions have reported seizure of phenibut.
The extent of non-medical use is unknown.

Therapeutic usefulness
Phenibut is approved in a few countries as a medicine for various psychiatric and
neurological conditions.

Recommendation
The Committee noted that concern has been raised in several countries on
nonmedical use of phenibut. While there have been reports of adverse effects and
of a withdrawal syndrome after cessation of use, the information on these cases
is very limited. In addition, there is very little information on the abuse liability
of phenibut, on the magnitude of its misuse or abuse and on its similarity to
currently internationally controlled substances.
     The Committee also noted that phenibut is used therapeutically in a few
countries.
     Recommendation: The Committee recommended that phenibut (IUPAC
chemical name: 4-amino-3-phenylbutanoic acid) not be critically reviewed but
should be kept under surveillance by the WHO secretariat.
