
2.2 none
2.2.1 ADB-BUTINACA
Substance identification
ADB-BUTINACA (IUPAC chemical name: N-[1-(Aminocarbonyl)-2,2-
dimethylpropyl]-1-butyl-1H-indazole-3-carboxamide) is an indazole-derived
synthetic cannabinoid. It is described as a crystalline solid or a beige or yellowish
powder and has also been found sprayed onto plant material and paper. It is
commonly smoked or vaped, although isolated cases of oral use have also been
reported.

WHO review history
ADB-BUTINACA has not been formally reviewed by WHO and is not currently
under international control. Information was brought to the attention of WHO
that this substance is manufactured clandestinely, poses a risk to public health and
has no recognized therapeutic use.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
ADB-BUTINACA is a synthetic cannabinoid that binds to CB1 and CB2 receptors
with high affinity and is a potent full agonist at both receptors. Its effects are similar
to those of other potent CB1 agonists that are currently controlled under Schedule
II of the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971.
      No controlled studies of the effects of ADB-BUTINACA have been reported.
Online self-reports describe euphoria, appetite stimulation, sedation and paranoia
after its use. These effects are consistent with the known effects of cannabinoid
agonists.

Dependence potential
No controlled studies of the dependence potential of ADB-BUTINACA in animals
or humans have been reported. Its effects at the CB1 receptor suggest that it would
be expected to produce dependence similar to other synthetic cannabinoids.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
In an animal model predictive of abuse potential, ADB-BUTINACA had effects
similar to the CB1 receptor agonist delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol. No studies have
been conducted to determine the likelihood of abuse of ADB-BUTINACA in
humans; however, CB1 receptor agonists have known abuse potential.
         A number of countries in various regions have reported use of ADB-BUTINACA
and harm related to its use, including multiple deaths and presentations of patients
to emergency departments with altered consciousness and loss of consciousness.
Other substances were usually also involved in these cases, although a number of
deaths involved only ADB-BUTINACA.

Therapeutic usefulness
ADB-BUTINACA is not known to have any therapeutic use.

Recommendation
ADB-BUTINACA (N-[1-(Aminocarbonyl)-2,2-dimethylpropyl]-1-butyl-1H-
indazole-3-carboxamide) is a potent synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonist
with a mechanism of action and effects similar to those of a number of other
synthetic cannabinoids that are controlled under Schedule II of the Convention
on Psychotropic Substances of 1971. Its mode of action suggests the likelihood of
abuse and potential for dependence. Use of ADB-BUTINACA has been associated
with severe adverse effects, including fatal intoxications. ADB-BUTINACA has
no known therapeutic use.
         Recommendation: The Committee recommended that ADB-BUTINACA (N-[1-
(Aminocarbonyl)-2,2-dimethylpropyl]-1-butyl-1H-indazole-3-carboxamide) be
added to Schedule II of the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971.

2.2.2 Adinazolam
Substance identification
Adinazolam (IUPAC chemical name: 8-Chloro-N,N-dimethyl-6-phenyl-4H-[1,2,4]
triazolo[4,3-a][1,4]benzodiazepine-1-methanamine) is a triazolobenzodiazepine.
Adinazolam appears as a white or yellow powder and is also sold as tablets and
capsules.

WHO review history
Adinazolam has not been formally reviewed by WHO and is not currently under
international control. Information was brought to the attention of WHO that this
substance is manufactured clandestinely, poses a risk to public health and has no
recognized therapeutic use.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Adinazolam is a short-acting benzodiazepine with moderate affinity for the
benzodiazepine receptor. It is a chemical analogue of alprazolam and triazolam.
         Consistent with its benzodiazepine receptor action, adinazolam showed
anticonvulsant, anxiolytic and antidepressant properties in animals. In humans,
adinazolam (and its metabolite N-desmethyladinazolam) produced a dose-
dependent decrease in psychomotor performance and increased sedation and
amnesia. It also had some subjective effects similar to those of benzodiazepines
such as diazepam and lorazepam, which are controlled under Schedule IV of the
1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances.

Dependence potential
No studies have been conducted in animals or humans on the dependence
potential of adinazolam. In view of its mechanism of action, however, it would be
expected to produce typical benzodiazepine dependence.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
In animals, adinazolam shows behavioural effects consistent with those of drugs
with abuse liability. In controlled studies in humans, adinazolam produced
sedation, and, in one controlled study, adinazolam produced a self-reported “high”
feeling, with a greater estimated street value than placebo.
         Currently, there is insufficient evidence that adinazolam is being abused to such
an extent as to constitute a public health problem. Seizures of adinazolam have
been reported in a few countries in two regions. Adinazolam has been identified
in falsified pharmaceutical benzodiazepine products, such as falsified alprazolam.
         Adinazolam was identified in a few drug-related deaths in combination with other
psychoactive substances, including opioids and other benzodiazepines; however,
there was no evidence that adinazolam played a causative role in these deaths.

Therapeutic usefulness
Adinazolam is not known to have any therapeutic uses and is not listed on the
WHO Model List of Essential Medicines.

Recommendation
Adinazolam (IUPAC chemical name: 8-Chloro-N,N-dimethyl-6-phenyl-4H-[1,2,4]
triazolo[4,3-a][1,4]benzodiazepine-1-methanamine) has effects similar to those of
substances listed under Schedule IV of the Convention on Psychotropic Substances
of 1971. There is, however, insufficient evidence that its use is a public health and
social problem to justify its placement under international control.
       Recommendation: The Committee recommended that adinazolam (IUPAC
chemical name: 8-Chloro-N,N-dimethyl-6-phenyl-4H-[1,2,4]triazolo[4,3-a]
[1,4]benzodiazepine-1-methanamine) be kept under surveillance by the WHO
Secretariat.

2.2.3 Bromazolam
Substance identification
Bromazolam (8-Bromo-1-methyl-6-phenyl-4H-[1,2,4]triazolo[4,3-a][1,4]
benzodiazepine) is a triazolobenzodiazepine. Bromazolam has been described as
a white or crystalline solid and has been identified in tablets, capsules, powders,
solutions and confectionary products. Bromazolam has been identified in falsified
pharmaceutical benzodiazepine products.

WHO review history
Bromazolam has not been formally reviewed by WHO and is not currently under
international control. Information was brought to the attention of WHO that this
substance is manufactured clandestinely, poses a risk to public health and has no
recognized therapeutic use.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
There is currently insufficient information on the pharmacological profile of
bromazolam from controlled studies in animals or humans to conclude that it has
effects similar to those of benzodiazepines, which are controlled under the 1971
Convention on Psychotropic Substances.
        Online self-reports by people who claim to have used bromazolam describe
benzodiazepine-like effects, including hypnotic, sedative, muscle relaxant and
euphoric effects. There are, however, no clinical reports or analytical confirmation
of bromazolam to confirm these effects.

Dependence potential
No controlled studies in animals or humans have been reported on the dependence
potential of bromazolam. Online self-reports describe withdrawal symptoms after
cessation of chronic use.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
No controlled studies in animals or humans have been reported on the abuse
liability of bromazolam. In self-reports online, people have described using the
drug for its euphoric and other benzodiazepine-like effects; however, there is no
confirmation that that the substance used was bromazolam.
        Seizures of bromazolam have been reported in multiple countries in several regions.
        Bromazolam has been analytically confirmed in a number of deaths, non-fatal
intoxications and instances of driving under the influence of drugs. Because
of the presence of other drugs, especially other benzodiazepines, however, the
contribution of bromazolam cannot be determined.

Therapeutic usefulness
Bromazolam is not known to have any therapeutic uses and has never been
marketed as a medicinal product.

Recommendation
While the chemical structure of bromazolam (8-Bromo-1-methyl-6-phenyl-
4H-[1,2,4]triazolo[4,3-a][1,4]benzodiazepine) is similar to those of other
benzodiazepines listed under the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of
1971, its mechanism of action and effects are yet to be confirmed. Although there is
increasing evidence of its use, no studies in animals or humans have been reported
on the effects or abuse potential of bromazolam. The limited information on its
effects provides insufficient evidence to justify placement of bromazolam under
international control.
          Recommendation: The Committee recommended that bromazolam (8-bromo-1-
methyl-6-phenyl-4H-[1,2,4]triazolo[4,3-a][1,4]benzodiazepine) be kept under
surveillance by the WHO Secretariat.

2.2.4 Protonitazene
Substance identification
Protonitazene (IUPAC chemical name: N,N-Diethyl-5-nitro-2-[(4-propoxyphenyl)
methyl]-1H-benzimidazole-1-ethanamine), also known as propoxynitazene, is a
5-nitro-2-benzylbenzimidazole synthetic opioid. Protonitazene has been described
as a white, yellow or brown powder and as a crystalline solid.

WHO review history
Protonitazene has not been formally reviewed by WHO and is not currently under
international control. Information was brought to the attention of WHO that this
substance is manufactured clandestinely, poses a risk to public health and has no
recognized therapeutic use.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Protonitazene is a chemical analogue of metonitazene and etonitazene, which
are controlled under Schedule I of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of
1961. Studies in animals have demonstrated that protonitazene is a full agonist at
μ-opioid receptors, with greater potency than morphine and similar potency to
fentanyl. Its effects are blocked by the opioid antagonist, naltrexone.

Dependence potential
No controlled studies of the dependence potential of protonitazene in animals or
humans have been reported. As it is a potent µ-opioid receptor agonist, it would
be expected to produce dependence similar to other opioids such as morphine
and fentanyl.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
In animals, protonitazene showed potent opioid effects and abuse potential, similar
to those of morphine and fentanyl. Its abuse potential has not been studied in
humans; however, online self-reports indicate typical opioid effects, including
sedation and euphoria.
         Protonitazene is relatively new on the illicit drug market, and there is limited
information on the prevalence of its use or of its harm. Several fatalities have
occurred in which the presence of protonitazene was confirmed, usually with other
substances. The number of deaths may be underreported because of limitations
in testing, including difficulty in differentiating this substance from isotonitazene.
Protonitazene is reported to be administered through various routes, including
intranasally and intravenously.
        Seizures of protonitazene have been reported in multiple countries in two regions.

Therapeutic usefulness
Protonitazene is not known to have any therapeutic use.

Recommendation
Protonitazene (IUPAC chemical name: N,N-Diethyl-5-nitro-2-[(4-propoxyphenyl)
methyl]-1H-benzimidazole-1-ethanamine), also known as propoxynitazene, is a
synthetic opioid that is liable to abuse and to produce ill effects similar to other
opioids that are controlled under Schedule I of the 1961 Single Convention on
Narcotic Drugs. Its use has been reported in a number of countries and has been
associated with adverse effects, including death. It has no known therapeutic use
and is likely to cause substantial harm.
       Recommendation: The Committee recommended that protonitazene (IUPAC
chemical name: N,N-Diethyl-5-nitro-2-[(4-propoxyphenyl)methyl]-1H-
benzimidazole-1-ethanamine), also known as propoxynitazene, be added to
Schedule I of the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs.

2.2.5 Etazene
Substance identification
Etazene (IUPAC chemical name: 2-[(4-Ethoxyphenyl)methyl]-N,N-diethyl-1H-
benzimidazole-1-ethanamine), also known as etodesnitazene, is a benzimidazole-
derived synthetic opioid. Etazene has been described as a grey crystalline, light-
yellow, white or beige powder. It has also been identified in liquid form and in
falsified pharmaceutical opioids.

WHO review history
Etazene has not been formally reviewed by WHO and is not currently under
international control. Information was brought to the attention of WHO that this
substance is manufactured clandestinely, poses a risk to public health and has no
recognized therapeutic use.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Etazene binds to the µ-opioid receptor with a potency greater than that of
morphine. In studies of analgesia in animals, etazene had full agonist effects, with
a potency between those of morphine and fentanyl, which are both controlled
under Schedule I of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961. The effects
of etazene are reversed by the opioid antagonist, naltrexone.

Dependence potential
No controlled studies of the dependence potential of etazene in animals or in
humans have been reported. As it is a potent µ-opioid receptor agonist, it would
be expected to produce dependence similar to other opioids, such as morphine
and fentanyl. Online self-reports described tolerance with repeated use of etazene.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
In an animal model predictive of abuse potential, etazene had effects similar
to those of morphine. No controlled studies have been conducted of the abuse
potential of etazene in humans, but, as it is a potent µ-opioid receptor agonist, it
would be expected to produce euphoria and other effects predictive of high abuse
liability. Online self-reports support its euphoric and other opioid effects.
        Seizures of etazene have been reported in multiple countries in two regions.
        A number of deaths have occurred in which the presence of etazene was confirmed
analytically and in which it was considered to have contributed to death, although
other substances were also identified in these cases.

Therapeutic usefulness
Etazene is not known to have any therapeutic use.

Recommendation
Etazene (IUPAC chemical name: 2-[(4-Ethoxyphenyl)methyl]-N,N-diethyl-1H-
benzimidazole-1-ethanamine), also known as etodesnitazene, is a synthetic opioid
that is liable to abuse and produces ill effects similar to other opioids that are
controlled under Schedule I of the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs.
Its use has been reported in a number of countries and has been associated with
adverse effects, including death. It has no known therapeutic use and poses a
significant risk to public health.
            Recommendation: The Committee recommended that etazene (IUPAC chemical
name: 2-[(4-Ethoxyphenyl)methyl]-N,N-diethyl-1H-benzimidazole-1-
ethanamine), also known as etodesnitazene, be added to Schedule I of the 1961
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs.

2.2.6 Etonitazepyne
Substance identification
Etonitazepyne (IUPAC chemical name: 2-[(4-Ethoxyphenyl)methyl]-5-nitro-
1-(2-pyrrolidin-1-ylethyl)-1Hbenzoimidazole), also known as N-pyrrolidino
etonitazene, is a benzimidazole-derived synthetic opioid. Etonitazepyne is found
as a yellow powder and crystalline solid and has been identified in falsified
pharmaceutical opioid tablets.

WHO review history
Etonitazepyne has not been formally reviewed by WHO and is not currently under
international control. Information was brought to the attention of WHO that this
substance is manufactured clandestinely, poses a risk to public health and has no
recognized therapeutic use.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Studies in animals have demonstrated that etonitazepyne is a potent, full agonist
at μ-opioid receptors. In animals, it produces effects similar to those of opioids
such as morphine, fentanyl and isotonitazene but with greater potency. There is
limited information about the effects of etonitazepyne alone in humans.

Dependence potential
No controlled studies of the dependence potential of etonitazepyne in animals or
humans have been reported. As it is a potent µ-opioid receptor agonist, it would
be expected to produce dependence similarly to other opioids, such as morphine
and fentanyl. Online self-reports describe tolerance and withdrawal after repeated
etonitazepyne use.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
In an animal model predictive of abuse potential, etonitazepyne was shown to
produce effects that indicated greater potency compared to morphine and fentanyl,
and these effects were reversed by the opioid antagonist, naltrexone.
    Seizures of etonitazepyne have been reported in multiple countries in two regions.
It is reported to be administered by various routes, including snorting, sniffing
and oral administration. Etonitazepyne has been identified in falsified medicines,
suggesting that its use may sometimes be unintentional.
         Etonitazepyne is a relatively new drug on the illicit market, and there is limited
information on the prevalence of its use and of its harm, although non-fatal and
fatal intoxications have been documented in a number of countries. The number
of deaths involving etonitazepyne has increased over a relatively short time but
may be underreported because of its recent, rapid appearance.

Therapeutic usefulness
Etonitazepyne is not known to have any therapeutic use.

Recommendation
Etonitazepyne (IUPAC chemical name: 2-[(4-Ethoxyphenyl)methyl]-5-nitro-
1-(2-pyrrolidin-1-ylethyl)-1Hbenzoimidazole), also known as N-pyrrolidino
etonitazene, is a synthetic opioid that is liable to abuse and to produce ill effects
similar to other opioids that are controlled under Schedule I of the 1961 Single
Convention on Narcotic Drugs. Its use has been reported in a number of countries
and has been associated with adverse effects, including death. It has no known
therapeutic use and poses a significant risk to public health.
        Recommendation: The Committee recommended that etonitazepyne (IUPAC
chemical name: 2-[(4-Ethoxyphenyl)methyl]-5-nitro-1-(2-pyrrolidin-1-ylethyl)-
1H-benzoimidazole), also known as N-pyrrolidino etonitazene, be added to
Schedule I of the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs.

2.2.7 2-methyl-AP-237
Substance identification
2-Methyl-AP-237 (IUPAC chemical name: 1-[2-Methyl-4-(3-phenyl-2-propen-
1-yl)-1-piperazinyl]-1-butanone) is a methyl derivative of the opioid analgesic
AP-237 (or bucinnazine).
       2-Methyl-AP-237 has been described as a white crystalline powder, a crystalline
solid and a white solid.

WHO review history
2-Methyl-AP-237 has not been formally reviewed by WHO and is not currently
under international control. Information was brought to the attention of WHO
that this substance is manufactured clandestinely, poses a risk to public health and
has no recognized therapeutic use.                                                               15

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
2-Methyl-AP-237 is an opioid analgesic with a rapid onset of action and a potency
and analgesic effects similar to those of fentanyl, which is listed under Schedule I
of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961. In animals, it produces acute
toxic effects typical of opioids, including respiratory depression. Limited research
has been reported on the effects of 2-methyl-AP-237 in humans, although its
respiratory depressant effects have been observed, which can be reversed by the
opioid antagonist, naloxone.

Dependence potential
No controlled studies of the dependence potential of 2-methyl-AP-237 have been
reported in animals or humans. As it is a µ-opioid receptor agonist, it would be
expected to produce dependence similar to that induced by other opioids, such as
morphine and fentanyl. Online self-reports described tolerance and withdrawal.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
In an animal model predictive of abuse potential, 2-methyl-AP-237 was shown to
produce opioid-like effects with a potency between those of morphine and fentanyl.
These effects were blocked by the opioid antagonist, naltrexone.
      No controlled studies on the abuse potential of 2-methyl-AP-237 in humans have
been reported, but, as it is a µ-opioid receptor agonist, it would be expected to
produce euphoria and other effects predictive of high abuse liability. Online self-
reports support its euphoric and other opioid effects.
        Seizures of 2-methyl-AP-237 have been reported in multiple countries in two
regions.
        A number of deaths in which 2-methyl-AP-237 has been found have been reported,
often with multiple substances involved. The deaths occurred in a number of
countries and regions.

Therapeutic usefulness
2-Methyl-AP-237 is not known to have any therapeutic use.

Recommendation
2-Methyl-AP-237 (IUPAC chemical name: 1-[2-Methyl-4-(3-phenyl-2-propen-1-
yl)-1-piperazinyl]-1-butanone) is a synthetic opioid that is liable to abuse and to
have ill effects similar to those of other opioids that are controlled under Schedule I
of the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs. Its use has been reported in a
number of countries and has been associated with adverse effects, including death.
It has no known therapeutic use and is likely to cause substantial harm.
     Recommendation: The Committee recommended that 2-methyl-AP-237 (IUPAC
chemical name: 1-[2-Methyl-4-(3-phenyl-2-propen-1-yl)-1-piperazinyl]-1-
butanone) be added to Schedule I of the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs.

2.2.8 α-PiHP
Substance identification
a-Pyrrolidinoisohexanophenone (IUPAC chemical name: 4-Methyl-1-phenyl-2-
(pyrrolidin-1-yl)pentan-1-one), also known as a-PiHP, is a synthetic cathinone.
It has been described as an off-white solid, a white powder and a crystalline solid.

WHO review history
a-PiHP has not been formally reviewed by WHO and is not currently under
international control. Information was brought to the attention of WHO that this
substance is manufactured clandestinely, poses a risk to public health and has no
recognized therapeutic use.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
a-PiHP is an isomer of a-PHP, which is controlled under Schedule II of the
Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971. Laboratory studies suggest that
a-PiHP can inhibit the uptake of dopamine and norepinephrine more potently
than substances with known abuse potential, including methcathinone, cocaine and
methamphetamine. Studies in animals have shown that a-PiHP is a psychomotor
stimulant, with effects comparable to those of cocaine and methamphetamine.
           Online self-reports by people who use a-PiHP describe stimulant effects similar
to those of a-PVP and a-PHP.

Dependence potential
No controlled studies of the dependence potential of a-PiHP in animals or humans
have been reported. In view of its actions and effects on the central nervous system,
it would be expected to produce dependence similarly to other psychostimulants
such as methamphetamine.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
Studies in animals predictive of abuse liability indicate that a-PiHP produces
effects similar to those of methamphetamine and cocaine. No controlled studies
of the abuse potential of a-PiHP in humans have been reported.
     Seizures of a-PiHP have been described in multiple countries in three regions.
a-PiHP has been identified in a number of serious adverse events and drug-related
deaths. As it is usually detected with other substances, including opioids and
benzodiazepines, the role of a-PiHP is unclear in some instances.

Therapeutic usefulness
a-PiHP is not known to have any therapeutic use.

Recommendation
a-Pyrrolidinoisohexanophenone (IUPAC chemical name: 4-Methyl-1-phenyl-
2-(pyrrolidin-1-yl)pentan-1-one), also known as a-PiHP, is a synthetic
cathinone with effects similar to those of other synthetic cathinones and other
psychostimulants, such as methamphetamine, that are listed under Schedule II
of the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971. There is evidence that its
abuse is likely to constitute a substantial public health and social problem. It has
no known therapeutic use.
         Recommendation: The Committee recommended that a-pyrrolidinoiso-
hexanophenone (IUPAC chemical name: 4-methyl-1-phenyl-2-(pyrrolidin-1-
yl)pentan-1-one), also known as a-PiHP, be added to Schedule II of the 1971
Convention on Psychotropic Substances.

2.2.9 3-MMC
Substance identification
3-Methylmethcathinone (IUPAC chemical name: 2-(Methylamino)-1-(3-
methylphenyl)propan-1-one), also known as 3-MMC, is a synthetic cathinone.
3-Methylmethcathinone has been found as a white or off-white powder, a white,
yellow or orange solid and a crystalline solid. It has been detected in tablet, capsule
and liquid forms.

WHO review history
3-Methylmethcathinone was critically reviewed by the Committee at its
38th meeting, in 2016, when it decided to request a further critical review
once more information became available and to consider it at a subsequent
meeting. Information was brought to the attention of WHO that this substance
is manufactured clandestinely, poses a risk to public health and has no
recognized therapeutic use. Information from international agencies suggests
that there has been a significant increase in the availability of and harm due to
3-methylmethcathinone in recent years.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
3-Methylmethcathinone is an isomer of 4-methylmethcathinone (mephedrone),
which is a synthetic cathinone listed under Schedule II of the Convention on
Psychotropic Substances of 1971.
         3-Methylmethcathinone has a typical psychostimulant profile, similar to that
of 4-methylmethcathinone, including inhibition of the reuptake of dopamine,
norepinephrine and serotonin and increased release of dopamine and serotonin.

Clinical features of 3-methylmethcathinone intoxication are consistent with those
produced by other stimulants and include tachycardia, hypertension, agitation,
aggression, hallucinations, rhabdomyolysis and kidney failure.

Dependence potential
No controlled studies of the dependence potential of 3-methylmethcathinone in
animals or humans have been reported. Withdrawal symptoms indicative of physical
dependence have been documented in people who use 3-methylmethcathinone. In
view of its actions and effects on the central nervous system, 3-methylmethcathinone
would be expected to produce dependence similar to other psychostimulants, such
as methamphetamine.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
In animal models predictive of rewarding effects, 3-methylmethcathinone produced
effects that were similar to those of methamphetamine. 3-Methylmethcathinone
also produced behavioural (stimulant) effects similar to methamphetamine.
No controlled studies in humans have examined the abuse potential of
3-methylmethcathinone.
        3-Methylmethcathinone has been seized in multiple countries in several regions.
        Many fatal and non-fatal intoxications involving 3-methylmethcathinone
have been reported. Other substances were commonly involved in these cases,
although severe intoxication and death have been reported in cases in which
3-methylmethcathinone was the only substance identified.

Therapeutic usefulness
3-Methylmethcathinone is not known to have any therapeutic use.

Recommendation
3-Methylmethcathinone (IUPAC chemical name: 2-(Methylamino)-1-(3-
methylphenyl)propan-1-one), also known as 3-MMC, is a synthetic cathinone with
effects similar to those of other synthetic cathinones and other psychostimulants
such as methamphetamine that are listed under Schedule II of the Convention
on Psychotropic Substances of 1971. There is evidence that its abuse is likely
to constitute a substantial public health and social problem. It has no known
therapeutic use.
         Recommendation: The Committee recommended that 3-methylmethcathinone
(IUPAC chemical name: 2-(Methylamino)-1-(3-methylphenyl)propan-1-one), also
known as 3-MMC, be added to Schedule II of the Convention on Psychotropic
Substances of 1971.

2.3     Recommendations on preliminary reviews (pre-reviews)
2.3.1 Zopiclone
Substance identification
Zopiclone (IUPAC chemical name: 6-(5-Chloropyridin-2-yl)-7-oxo-6,7-dihydro-
5H-pyrrolo[3,4-b]pyrazin-5-yl 4-methylpiperazine-1-carboxylate) is a sedative
hypnotic drug of the cyclopyrrolone class. Zopiclone has been reported as a white
or slightly yellowish powder. Zopiclone is available as pharmaceutical products in
tablet form for oral use. Eszopiclone (the S-enantiomer of zopiclone) is marketed
as a pharmaceutical product in some countries.

WHO review history
Zopiclone was pre-reviewed by the Committee at its 29th meeting, when it
recommended that surveillance be continued but that a critical review was not
required. In view of the abuse liability of the drug and the significant number
of reports of adverse drug reactions related to zopiclone abuse sent to the
WHO international drug monitoring programme, however, zopiclone was pre-
reviewed by the Committee at its 33rd meeting, when it recommended a critical
review. Zopiclone was critically reviewed at the 34th meeting, in 2006, when
the Committee rated its abuse liability as low and its therapeutic usefulness
considerable and recommended continued surveillance by WHO. A pre-review
was initiated after a proposal was received from an international agency that
suggested a significant increase in the reported number of trafficking cases and
seizures involving zopiclone.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Zopiclone binds to the benzodiazepine receptor that forms part of the GABAA
receptor complex. It may bind to different parts of the receptor or cause different
changes in the GABAA receptor complex than benzodiazepines.
        In animals, zopiclone has sedative, anxiolytic, anticonvulsant and muscle relaxant
properties similar to those of benzodiazepines. In studies in humans, it was less
effective than benzodiazepines for treatment of anxiety.

Dependence potential
Studies in animals show evidence of zopiclone tolerance and withdrawal,
indicating the development of physical dependence. A number of published
reports have described physical dependence associated with zopiclone use in
humans. Withdrawal symptoms such as increased anxiety and insomnia have
been described in people who cease zopiclone use, usually after prolonged use
and dose escalation from clinical use. Tolerance and withdrawal have also been
reported in clinical trials. Dependence is documented in databases on adverse
events associated with use of pharmaceutical drugs.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
Studies in animals suggest that zopiclone may have abuse liability similar to that of
benzodiazepines such as midazolam, diazepam, nitrazepam and alprazolam. The
effects indicative of abuse liability were blocked by the benzodiazepine antagonist
flumazenil, indicating a mechanism of action involving the benzodiazepine
receptor.
        No controlled studies in humans have been reported on the abuse potential of
zopiclone. Published reports support its abuse potential, its use with alcohol and
other drugs, excessive use and escalation to high-dose use. The extent of harm
related to the use of zopiclone is, however, unclear.
        Zopiclone is widely used therapeutically in many countries and regions, and it
is also listed in databases of adverse events associated with pharmaceutical use.
Zopiclone is most likely to be misused by individuals to whom it is prescribed for
long periods, who are using other psychoactive drugs or in those with psychiatric
comorbidities. While seizures of zopiclone have been reported in multiple
countries in several regions, the prevalence of non-medical use of zopiclone by
the general population is unknown. Furthermore, there is insufficient evidence
that significant public health and social problems related to abuse can be directly
attributed to sole use of zopiclone.

Therapeutic usefulness
Zopiclone is a widely used medicine primarily indicated for the short-term
treatment of insomnia.

Recommendation
Zopiclone (IUPAC chemical name: 6-(5-Chloropyridin-2-yl)-7-oxo-6,7-dihydro-
5H-pyrrolo[3,4-b]pyrazin-5-yl 4-methylpiperazine-1-carboxylate) is a sedative
hypnotic drug of the cyclopyrrolone class. The Committee noted that concern has
been expressed in several countries regarding non-prescription use of zopiclone.
While there have been reports of adverse effects, overdose, withdrawal symptoms
and an increased number of seizures of the substance, there is still insufficient
evidence that zopiclone is or is likely to be abused to such an extent as to constitute
a public health and social problem.
      The Committee also noted that zopiclone is widely used therapeutically in many
countries.
      Recommendation: The Committee recommended that zopiclone (IUPAC chemical
name: 6-(5-Chloropyridin-2-yl)-7-oxo-6,7-dihydro-5H-pyrrolo[3,4-b]pyrazin-
5-yl4-methylpiperazine-1-carboxylate) not proceed to critical review but be kept
under surveillance by the WHO Secretariat.
