
1.2 nothing
3.1.2   Amfepramone (INN)
Substance identification
Amfepramone is chemically 2-(diethylamino)propiophenone (CAS
No. 90-84-6 for base, 134-80-5 for hydrochloride). It is also known
as diethylpropion. Amfepramone is marketed under many trade
names.

Previous review
Amfepramone was included in Schedule IV of the 1971 Convention at
the time of its adoption. It was reviewed by a WHO Review Group in
1980 (5), which concluded that there was no evidence to recommend
a change in the level of its international control. Amfepramone was
pre-reviewed at the previous meeting of the Committee (4) when a
critical review was recommended based on information from the
International Narcotics Control Board (INCB) that abuse and illicit
trafﬁcking of amfepramone had been reported from nearly all regions
of the world, and had become particularly widespread in Asia and the
Russian Federation.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central
nervous system
Amfepramone is an anorectic amphetamine analogue used for treat-
ing obesity. It has a spectrum of pharmacological effects similar to
that of scheduled amphetamines, including the release of dopamine.

Dependence potential
Dependence on amfepramone can occur but there are few data avail-
able on its incidence. In some patients, tolerance to the anorectic
effects of the drug may occur within 6 to 12 weeks. Amfepramone has
been shown to produce euphoria and other mood changes character-
istic of drugs of abuse.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
Information from INCB indicates that illicit trafﬁc in amfepramone
has been reported from many countries and regions. In several coun-
tries in South America, overuse of anorectic stimulants has led to
additional educational and regulatory actions being undertaken by
the authorities. However, the small number of adverse drug reaction
reports related to abuse received by the international drug monitor-
ing programme does not suggest a high liability of amfepramone to
abuse. The response of governments to the WHO questionnaire also
indicated that diversion and abuse of the drug were limited.

Therapeutic usefulness
Amfepramone has been used as an oral anorectic in the treatment of
obesity, although stimulants are not generally recommended for this
indication. The drug is indicated only as an adjunct to other forms of
therapy (such as caloric restriction, exercise and behaviour modiﬁ-
cation techniques). Some medicinal regulatory authorities in the
European Union have already withdrawn amfepramone from the
market because of concerns about its safety. The global consumption
of amfepramone has been decreasing since 1997, in line with the
decline in the total consumption of stimulants in Schedule IV of the
1971 Convention.

Recommendation
The Committee judged that according to the scheduling criteria set
out in the Guidelines, a psychotropic substance in Schedule IV of the
1971 Convention, such as amfepramone, should have a liability to
abuse that poses a “signiﬁcant” risk to public health. The Committee
did not recommend a change in the scheduling status of amfepramone
since the information available to it was insufﬁcient to justify placing
this drug in Schedule II or III which require that a substance consti-
tutes a “substantial” risk to public health. Law enforcement data on
the extent of illicit activities involving stimulants in other schedules of
the 1971 Convention may enable the risk of abuse of amfepramone to
be compared with abuse of other stimulants in the future. In the
meantime, in view of the existing concern about its safety in medical
use, the Committee recommended that informational and educa-
tional activities to curb its overuse be intensiﬁed.

3.1.3   Amineptine (INN)
Substance identification
Amineptine         (7-[(10,11-dihydro-5H-dibenzo[a,d]cyclohepten-5-
yl)amino]heptanoic acid) is available as either the free base (CAS
57574-09-1) or as the hydrochloride salt (CAS 30272-08-3). There are
no chiral carbon atoms, therefore, no stereoisomers or racemates are
possible.

Previous review
Amineptine was pre-reviewed at the thirty-second meeting of the
Committee (4) and critical review was recommended.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central
nervous system
Amineptine is a synthetic, atypical tricyclic antidepressant with stimu-
lating effects on the central nervous system. It is an indirect dopamine
agonist, which selectively inhibits dopamine uptake and induces
dopamine release, with additional stimulation of the adrenergic sys-
tem. Its antidepressant effects are similar to those of other tricyclic
antidepressant drugs but amineptine has a more rapid action, is better
tolerated and has few cardiovascular, analgesic or anorectic effects. It
produces a similar spectrum of pharmacological effects to the psycho-
motor stimulants in Schedule II of the 1971 Convention.

Dependence potential
There have been few animal studies on the potential for dependence
or abuse of amineptine. However, some clinical studies have indi-
cated that amineptine has the potential both for dependence and
abuse, particularly in patients with a previous history of substance
abuse. Members of the Committee reported on their observations of
signiﬁcant abuse and dependence in patients treated with amineptine
in France. The dependence potential of the drug appeared to be
associated with its psychomotor stimulant effect. The clinical manifes-
tations of withdrawal include anxiety, insomnia, psychomotor agita-
tion and bulimia. Instances of dependence have been reported in Asia
and Europe.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
Amineptine abuse has been reported mainly in Asia and Europe. The
drug has been withdrawn from the market in France, where it was
developed a few decades ago, because of its considerable hepatotox-
icity and abuse. However, its medical use in developing countries, as
well as its abuse continue. The reports of adverse drug reactions
collected by the international drug monitoring programme indi-
cated a larger number of case reports of abuse and dependence for
amineptine than for other anorectic stimulants currently placed
in Schedule IV of the 1971 Convention, such as amfepramone. The
responses of governments to the WHO questionnaire also indicated
limited diversion and abuse of the drug although some reported hos-
pital admissions have been linked to the use or abuse of amineptine.

Therapeutic usefulness
The therapeutic usefulness of amineptine is limited because of its
hepatotoxicity, secondary features such as acne eruption and anxiety,
and the availability of safer antidepressants. Of the 103 countries that
responded to the WHO questionnaire, only 17 indicated amineptine
use.

Recommendation
The Committee considered that the degree of risk to public health
and society associated with the abuse liability of amineptine is sub-
stantial and noted that its use is associated with signiﬁcant hepatotox-
icity. Its therapeutic usefulness has been assessed to be from little
to moderate, at best. Although it has already been withdrawn from
the market in several countries, amineptine continues to be available
in a number of others. The Committee therefore considered that the
likelihood of its abuse warranted its placement under international
control. The Committee recommended that amineptine be placed in
Schedule II of the 1971 Convention.

3.1.4   Buprenorphine (INN)
Substance identification
Buprenorphine is chemically 21-cyclopropyl-7-a-[(S)-1-hydroxy-1,2,
2-trimethylpropyl]-6,14-endo-ethano-6,7,8,14-tetrahydrooripavine
(CAS 53152-21-9 for hydrochloride; 52485-79-7 for free base). It is
marketed under at least 26 trade names.

Previous review
In 1983, a WHO Review Group did not recommend international
control of buprenorphine, although it recommended the inclusion of
pentazocine (a pharmacologically related substance) in Schedule III
of the 1971 Convention (6). A critical review of buprenorphine was
again undertaken at the twenty-ﬁfth meeting of the Committee (7),
which recommended its placement in Schedule III of the 1971 Con-
vention. However, other than the difference between the partial
m-opioid agonist buprenorphine and such prototypic m-opioid ago-
nists as heroin, morphine and methadone, the Committee did not
provide any additional explanation for the choice of the 1971 Conven-
tion over the 1961 Convention. In its report for 1995, INCB requested
a revision of the control system of buprenorphine by WHO. In con-
sideration of these issues and evidence of signiﬁcant abuse and
illicit trafﬁcking despite international control in Schedule III of the
1971 Convention, the Committee recommended critical review of
buprenorphine at its thirty-second meeting (4).

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central
nervous system
Buprenorphine is a partial m-opioid agonist and k-opioid receptor
antagonist. It has been widely marketed as an analgesic and more
recently has been used in the treatment of opioid dependence. As a
partial m-opioid agonist it produces pharmacological effects similar to
those of low-to-moderate doses of morphine and other full m-opioid
agonists, but has a signiﬁcantly lower maximal effect. Because of its
low intrinsic activity, high afﬁnity for, and slow dissociation from, the
m-opioid receptor it precipitates withdrawal syndrome in morphine-
dependent animals and humans. Furthermore, pretreatment with
buprenorphine attenuates the effects of morphine and other full
m-opioid agonists. For these reasons buprenorphine is both an opioid
agonist and an antagonist.

Dependence potential
Buprenorphine has reinforcing effects in animal studies, produces
euphoria and other positive mood changes in opioid abusers and
produces mild physical dependence. No studies published after the
twenty-ﬁfth meeting of the Committee (7) have suggested the need
for revising their earlier conclusion that buprenorphine does have
signiﬁcant dependence potential.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
Although buprenorphine is widely marketed, France and the United
Kingdom consume far more of the drug on a per capita basis than the
other countries. In France, where buprenorphine is the main mainte-
nance treatment for patients with opioid dependence that general
practitioners are allowed to prescribe, there have been reports of
diversion and abuse by polydrug abusers. Information from other
countries and INCB on diversion and abuse indicates that
buprenorphine is liable to be abused so as to constitute a substantial
risk to public health and society. Despite the diversion and abuse
of buprenorphine in France the number of deaths from opioid over-
dosage has decreased signiﬁcantly following the introduction of
buprenorphine substitution therapy. Overall, the risk–beneﬁt ratio
for the use of buprenorphine in the treatment of opioid dependence
was judged by the Committee to be favourable.

Therapeutic usefulness
Buprenorphine is currently used in about 60 countries as an analgesic
and in about 30 countries for substitution treatment of opioid depen-
dence. However, its use as a treatment for opioid dependence is
rapidly increasing.

Application of the Guidelines
The majority of the Members of the Committee considered that,
on the basis of the similarity criterion, buprenorphine should be re-
classiﬁed under the 1961 Convention. The Committee considered
that buprenorphine has greater similarity to morphine than to
lefetamine, the only analgesic drug controlled as a psychotropic
substance at the time the 1971 Convention was adopted. Although
lefetamine is an analgesic that binds to brain opioid receptors it was
abused during the 1950s in Japan for its stimulant effects on the
central nervous system.
The Committee also noted that the scheduling criterion for psycho-
tropic substances would apply to almost all drugs controlled under the
1961 Convention. Morphine and cocaine are clearly psychoactive
substances capable of producing stimulation or depression of the
central nervous system, “resulting in hallucinations or disturbances in
motor function, thinking, behaviour, perception or mood”. They are
also dependence-producing. Therefore, morphine and cocaine meet
the ﬁrst-level requirement for being scheduled as psychotropic sub-
stances. There is no authoritative guidance, in either the 1971 Con-
vention or in the Guidelines, as to which of the two optional criteria
the Committee should apply. The Committee was also informed that
the Guidelines require stronger justiﬁcation for recommending a
change in the control status of a substance from one convention to
another.

Recommendation
For the reasons stated above, the Committee considered that the
ﬁnal decision on buprenorphine should be taken at a future meeting
of the Committee. The Committee also recommended that WHO, in
consultation with the United Nations, develop guiding principles for
making the choice between the two optional scheduling criteria for
psychotropic substances and elaborate the Guidelines with regard to
the choice of the more appropriate convention when a substance
under review has some similarity to both a psychotropic substance
and a narcotic drug. This issue is of particular relevance to the consid-
eration of changing the control of a substance from one convention to
the other.

3.5.1   Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
Substance identification
Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol is chemically 6a,7,8,10a-tetrahydro-
6,6,9-trimethyl-3-pentyl-6H-dibenzo[b,d]pyran-1-ol.    Dronabinol
(CAS 1972-08-3) is the INN for one of the stereochemical variants of
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol, namely (-)-trans-delta-9-tetrahydro-
cannabinol.

Previous review
Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol was included in Schedule I of the 1971
Convention at the time of its adoption. At its twenty-sixth meeting,
the Committee recommended that dronabinol be moved to Schedule
II, while keeping the other isomers and their stereochemical variants
in Schedule I. This proposal was rejected by the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs, and the Committee reviewed the question again at its
twenty-seventh meeting when it recommended that all the stere-
ochemical variants of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol be rescheduled to
Schedule II (8). This recommendation was adopted by the United
Nations. At its thirty-second meeting, the Committee pre-reviewed
dronabinol and recommended its critical review for consideration of
the rescheduling on the grounds that the rate of abuse of dronabinol
was extremely low (4).

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central
nervous system
Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol is the main active principle of cannabis
which is a well known psychotropic substance and exhibits the percep-
tion-altering effects possessed by cannabis.

Dependence potential
Although cannabis abuse is widespread, there is no evidence that
dronabinol shares the high abuse liability of cannabis.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
In terms of abuse potential, there may not be any signiﬁcant differ-
ence between delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabis, in which
this psychoactive substance occurs naturally. In terms of likelihood of
abuse, however, there is a very signiﬁcant difference between the two.
Cannabis abuse is widespread throughout the world whereas the
abuse of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol or of its preparations is rare.
Of the 103 countries that responded to the WHO Questionnaire, only
two indicated some abuse of this substance: Denmark reported some
abuse of “cannabinol”, clarifying that it meant the detection of delta-
9-tetrahydrocannabinol in the exhibit, and the questionnaire from the
USA mentioned three cases of abuse reported by the American
Association of Poison Control Centers during the period from 1992
to 1994.

Therapeutic usefulness
Dronabinol is indicated for the treatment of nausea and vomiting
associated with cancer chemotherapy in patients who have failed to
respond adequately to conventional antiemetic treatments and for the
treatment of anorexia associated with weight loss in patients with
acquired immunodeﬁciency syndrome (AIDS). Of the 103 countries
that responded to the WHO Questionnaire, only six reported
the regular availability of pharmaceutical products containing
dronabinol.

Recommendation
The abuse liability of dronabinol is expected to remain very low so
long as cannabis continues to be readily available. The Committee
considered that the abuse liability of dronabinol does not constitute
a substantial risk to public health and society. In accordance with
the established scheduling criteria, the Committee considered that
dronabinol should be rescheduled to schedule IV of the 1971 Con-
vention on Psychotropic Substances. To avoid placing different
stereochemical variants of the same substance under different control
systems, the Committee recommended that all stereochemical vari-
ants of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol be moved to Schedule IV of the
1971 Convention.

3.6.1   Tramadol (INN)
Substance identification
Tramadol,   chemically      (+/-)trans-2-dimethylaminomethyl-1-(3-
methoxyphenyl) cyclohexanol), is available as either the free base
(CAS 27203-92-5) or as the hydrochloride salt (CAS 36282-47-0). It is
marketed under over 100 trade names.

Previous review
Tramadol was pre-reviewed at the twenty-eighth meeting of the Com-
mittee at which time critical review was not recommended (9); how-
ever following pre-review at the thirty-second meeting, critical review
was recommended (4).

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central
nervous system
Tramadol has been found to be an opioid agonist with selectivity for
the m-opioid receptor but with some weak afﬁnity for the k- and
d-opioid receptors. The afﬁnity for the m-opioid receptor is approxi-
mately 10-fold less than that of codeine and 6000-fold less than that of
morphine. The O-desmethyl metabolite (ODT or M1) of tramadol
has a 200-fold greater afﬁnity than the parent compound for the
m-opioid receptor. In addition to its actions on brain opioid receptors
tramadol is an inhibitor of serotonin reuptake (+ isomer) and of
noradrenaline reuptake (- isomer). Tramadol induces analgesia, but
is associated with less respiratory depression than other opioids and
has no signiﬁcant cardiac effects. It has been found to reduce the
seizure and sweating thresholds but reduces postoperative shivering.
Tramadol has been noted to have some effects on the central nervous
system, notably dizziness; sedation; headache and, to a lesser extent,
euphoria; central nervous system stimulation (e.g. tremor, agitation,
anxiety and hallucinations); dysphoria and seizures. In the 1% of
patients who suffered seizures, they were found to be linked to a
predisposing factor such as epilepsy, alcohol or drug withdrawal or
antidepressant therapy. Toxic effects can be produced directly by
the drug and these effects may be exacerbated by the presence of
monoamine antidepressant drugs or central nervous system depres-
sant drugs. Overdose has been reported to result in bradycardia,
convulsions, respiratory depression and coma.

Dependence potential
Animal studies have indicated that tramadol produces little tolerance,
has mild withdrawal symptoms and a lower abuse potential than
codeine and pentazocine. Nevertheless, together with the rapid in-
crease in the medical use of tramadol worldwide, there have been
reports of dependence and abuse, particularly in opioid-dependent
individuals. The actions of the drug on brain monoamine systems
must also be considered in relation to its abuse potential.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
Of the 103 countries that responded to the WHO Questionnaire, 88
indicated the medical use of tramadol. Of these, 21 reported some
abuse and illicit trafﬁc. The reported cases of abuse originated pri-
marily from Europe and the United States. Deaths from overdose
were reported from France and the United States. In a few of these
countries, abuse of tramadol has led to regulatory actions such as
temporary suspension of marketing registration or the use of special
prescription forms. However, the assessment of its abuse liability is
made difﬁcult by the scarcity of quantitative data and considerable
differences in the experiences of individual countries. In Germany
where the drug was developed and has been on the market for 25
years without additional controls other than prescription require-
ments, the data from the drug abuse warning system suggest that
tramadol has lower abuse liability than buprenorphine and pentazo-
cine. The data from the drug abuse warning network of the USA, on
the other hand, suggest that its abuse potential may be roughly com-
parable to that of codeine or dextropropoxyphene in the USA. The
regulatory authorities in the USA required that the sponsor of
tramadol set up an independent group of scientists to conduct post-
marketing studies of abuse of and dependence on tramadol. These
studies found that the rate of abuse in the year following the introduc-
tion of tramadol to the market was 2–3 cases per 100 000 patients.
Subsequently, this rate declined to one case per 100 000. The adverse
drug reaction reports related to abuse of tramadol collected by the
international drug monitoring programme indicate larger numbers of
case reports of abuse, dependence and withdrawal syndrome for
tramadol than for any other analgesic, except butorphanol, which
ranks ﬁrst in the list of drugs for which “drug dependence” has been
reported. Many of these reports originated from the USA, where the
consumption of tramadol has been increasing rapidly since it was ﬁrst
marketed in 1995, a situation conducive to higher rates of reporting
adverse events.

Therapeutic usefulness
Tramadol is used as an analgesic agent for the treatment of moderate
to severe pain. It became available in Germany in the 1970s and was
subsequently marketed in Africa, the Americas and Asia, and is
currently used in 104 countries. It is however difﬁcult to judge
whether the rapid increase in its medical use reﬂects the recognition
of its therapeutic usefulness. The absence of international control
may be a contributing factor.

Recommendation
Pharmacologically, tramadol is more complex than prototypic
m-opioid receptor agonists, but one of its metabolites is a potent
m-opioid receptor agonist. This is consistent with its pattern of abuse
which is similar to that of opioids by opioid abusers, as well as its
opioid-like analgesic effects. The likelihood of abuse of tramadol
appears to vary between countries, depending on the prevalence of
opioid dependence, types of marketing strategy and other factors.
The information available is not sufﬁcient for the Committee to rec-
ommend international control of tramadol, but is adequate to recom-
mend that WHO keep the drug under surveillance.

4.1 nothing2
4.1.1   Ketamine (INN)
Summary
Ketamine, chemical name (±)-2-(2-chlorophenyl)-2-(methylamino)
cyclohexanone, has not previously been reviewed by WHO.
Ketamine is indicated to provide anaesthesia for short diagnostic and
surgical procedures that do not require skeletal muscle relaxation. Its
use in veterinary medicine must also be considered in relation to its
control. Ketamine hydrochloride has been abused as a hallucinogen
for almost 30 years. The drug produces effects similar to those of
phencyclidine, but with a much shorter duration. Limited abuse by
medical personnel has been reported in a number of countries. In
recent years, the abuse of ketamine mixed with or presented as N,a-
dimethyl-3,4-(methylenedioxy) phenethylamine (MDMA) has raised
a serious concern in Europe. Ketamine abuse is reported from a
number of countries in Asia, Europe and North America and it has
already been placed under national control in several countries.

Recommendation
On the basis of the information presented above, the Committee
recommended critical review of ketamine at a future meeting.

4.2.1   Zaleplon (INN)
Summary
Zaleplon, chemical name 3¢-(3-cyanopyrazolo[1,5-a]pyrimidin-7-yl)-
N-ethylacetanilide, has not previously been reviewed by WHO.
Zaleplon selectively binds to the brain alpha subunit of the GABAA
omega-1 receptor. Its pharmacological properties are similar to those
of zolpidem, and it is indicated for the short-term (2 to 4 weeks)
management of insomnia. It produces a benzodiazepine-type with-
drawal syndrome upon discontinuation of long-term use and studies
on subjective effects show its similarity to triazolam. Zaleplon has
been on the market for only a short time and the number of reports of
abuse-related adverse drug reactions received by the international
drug monitoring programme are as yet very few.

Recommendation
Although the abuse potential of this substance is considered to be
similar to that of zolpidem and triazolam, critical review was not
recommended at this stage as the information on actual abuse avail-
able to the Committee was insufﬁcient to conﬁrm the existence of
signiﬁcant public health and social problems in more than one coun-
try. However, the Committee recommended that WHO continue the
surveillance of zaleplon1.

4.3.3   Zopiclone (INN)
Summary
Zopiclone, chemical name 4-methyl-1-piperazinecarboxylic acid ester
with 6-(5-chloro-2-pyridyl)-6,7-dihydro-7-hydroxy-5H-pyrrolo[3,4-
b]pyrazin-5-one, was pre-reviewed at the twenty-ninth meeting of the
Committee in 1994 (10), which recommended continued surveillance,
but not a critical review.
    The pharmacological proﬁle of zopiclone is similar to that of chlor-
diazepoxide. The pharmacological activity of zopiclone is believed to
be related to its binding to the benzodiazepine receptor complex.
Studies of abuse liability in animals and humans have indicated that
zopiclone has some abuse potential together with the capacity to
produce withdrawal syndrome upon its discontinuation. In terms of
the number of adverse drug reaction reports related to abuse received
by the international drug monitoring programme, zopiclone ranks
higher than nitrazepam and temazepam. Furthermore, the Commit-
tee was informed that the government of Switzerland had submitted
a formal notiﬁcation to the United Nations concerning the scheduling
of zopiclone.

Recommendation
In accordance with the Guidelines, the Committee recommended the
critical review of zopiclone.

4.3.4   Butorphanol (INN)
Summary
Butorphanol, chemical name (-)-17-(cyclobutylmethyl)morphinan-
3,14-diol, was reviewed by a WHO Review Group in 1981 (11) and
1983 (6), and at the twenty-ﬁfth meeting of the Committee (7), which
did not recommend international control.
    Butorphanol is a synthetically derived opioid compound with mixed
agonist–antagonist properties at the m-opioid receptor. It exerts its
analgesic effect by acting as an agonist at the k-opioid receptors.
Butorphanol has a proﬁle of actions similar to those produced by
pentazocine. Two to three milligrams of parenterally administered
butorphanol produce analgesia and respiratory depression approxi-
mately equal to that caused by 10 mg of morphine. There have been a
signiﬁcant number of reports of abuse, withdrawal syndrome and
dependence related to butorphanol and this drug ranks ﬁrst in the list
of all drugs for which drug dependence has been reported as an
adverse drug reaction to the WHO International Drug Monitoring
Programme. Most of these reports originated from Canada, Italy,
the United Kingdom and the USA. In Canada, drug-seeking behav-
iour has been reported in association with the use and abuse of
butorphanol nasal spray. At least four countries have taken regula-
tory actions to control butorphanol, indicating that its abuse is consid-
ered as a signiﬁcant problem in more than one country.

Recommendation
On the basis of the above data the Committee recommended the
critical review of butorphanol.

4.5.3   Oripavine
Summary
Oripavine, O3-demethylthebaine, is a phenanthrene alkaloid con-
tained in species of the Papaver plant. It is a major metabolite of
thebaine.
        Oripavine has not previously been reviewed by WHO in the context
of international control. However, in a WHO review of the depen-
dence potential of thebaine held in 1980 (12), oripavine was suggested
to be a metabolite of thebaine in animals possibly involved in the
dependence potential.
           In recent years, large quantities of concentrate of poppy straw (de-
ﬁned as “all parts (except the seeds) of the opium poppy after mow-
ing”) containing oripavine as the main alkaloid has been produced,
traded and used for the production of opium alkaloids. It is an easy
industrial process to convert oripavine into thebaine through methy-
lation. Thebaine is in Schedule I of the 1961 Convention because it is
a precursor of codeine and morphine. For this reason, the convertibil-
ity of oripavine may meet the scheduling criteria for placing it in the
same Schedule as thebaine. However, the Commentary on the 1961
Convention indicates that the purpose of controlling drugs which are
convertible to scheduled narcotic drugs, is to prevent the abuse of the
narcotic drugs manufactured by the conversion process. Although
animal tests have shown that thebaine has some abuse potential, no
actual abuse of thebaine has been reported. It is therefore question-
able whether the convertibility criterion could be applied for the
scheduling of a substance when the drug produced by its conversion is
used only as a starting material for the manufacture of other narcotic
drugs. An additional problem is that there is no authoritative guid-
ance on how to distinguish between the criteria of the 1961 Conven-
tion concerning convertibility and the criteria introduced by the 1988
Convention (13) concerning the control of precursors. Since the
Guidelines do not provide any guidance on this question, the Com-
mittee was unable to recommend critical review of oripavine at this
stage.

Recommendation
The Committee urged WHO to develop additional scheduling guide-
lines in consultation with appropriate bodies of the United Nations
for clarifying issues related to the conversion of precursors into
scheduled substances.

4.6.3   Khat
Summary
Khat or qat refers to the leaves and the young shoots of the plant
Catha edulis Forsk. It has not previously been reviewed by WHO in
the context of international control.
    In many countries in Africa and the Arabian peninsula khat is tra-
ditionally consumed by chewing the tender leaves and stems. The
principal psychoactive substances contained in the khat leaves are
cathinone and cathine. Cathinone has been shown to have high abuse
potential, and is in Schedule I. Reports of actual abuse of cathine have
led to its being placed in Schedule III of the 1971 Convention. The
migration of users of khat has resulted in the spreading of khat use to
countries in other regions of the world. Khat is consumed at parties
where friends gather and hold conversations while smoking cigarettes
and drinking tea and soft drinks. The subjective effects of khat are
rewarding; however, khat use produces signiﬁcant toxic effects includ-
ing increased blood pressure, tachycardia, insomnia, anorexia, consti-
pation, a sense of general malaise, irritability, reactive depression,
migraine and impaired sexual potency in men. Khat is believed to be
dependence-producing. Cases of toxic psychosis and paranoia due to
khat have been described by a number of authors. Other reported
acute and chronic effects of khat include low birth weight in babies of
khat chewing women, reduced sperm count and motility, increased
risk of myocardial infarction and liver problems. In addition to the
reported health problems, the regular consumption of khat is also
associated with a variety of social and economic problems affecting
the consumers and their families. A number of countries in Africa,
Asia, Europe and North America have already placed khat under
national control.

Recommendation
The Committee considered that there was sufﬁcient information on
khat to justify a critical review.
