
2.1   Substances recommended for changes in scheduling
2.1.1 Dronabinol (INN)
Substance identification
Dronabinol (INN) is (6aR,10aR)-6a,7,8,10a-tetrahydro-6,6,9-trimethyl-3-
pentyl-6-H-dibenzo[b, d]pyran-1-ol. It is the (6aR,10aR)-stereoisomer of
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and is also designated (–)-trans-delta-9-tetra-
hydrocannabinol.
        Other stereoisomers of delta-9-tetrohydrocannabinol are: (6aR,10aS)-,
6aS,10aR)- and (6aS,10aS)-, also known as (–)-cis-, (+)-cis- and (+)-
trans-, respectively. Delta-9-tetrohydrocannabinol has two racemates,
6aRS,10aRS)- and (6aRS,10aSR)-, also known as (±)-trans- and (±)-cis-,
respectively.
        Originally, all isomers of tetrahydrocannabinol were included in Schedule I
of the 1971 Convention. This was later amended to include seven named
constitutional isomers and their respective stereochemical variants. The
term “constitutional isomers” used above has recently been introduced by
the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) to replace
the traditionally used term “positional isomers”.
    The term “stereochemical variants” used in the 1971 Convention and men-
tioned above is equivalent to the term “stereoisomers”, which is at present
much more widely used in the chemical and related literature. Both terms
cover geometric isomers and optical isomers.

Previous review
Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol was included in Schedule I of the 1971 Con-
vention at the time of its adoption. At its twenty-sixth meeting, the Com-
mittee recommended that dronabinol be moved to Schedule II, while keep-
ing the other isomers and their stereochemical variants in Schedule I (4).
This proposal was rejected at the 11th Special Session of the Commission
on Narcotic Drugs, and the Committee reviewed the question again at its
twenty-seventh meeting when it recommended that all the stereochemical
variants of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol be rescheduled to Schedule II (5).
This recommendation was adopted by the United Nations Commission on
Narcotic Drugs at its 34th session (6). At its thirty-second meeting, the
Committee pre-reviewed dronabinol and recommended its critical review
for consideration of the rescheduling on the grounds that the rate of abuse
of dronabinol was extremely low (7).
   Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol was critically reviewed by the Expert Com-
mittee on Drug Dependence at its thirty-third meeting in September 2002
3). On the basis of the available data the Committee considered that
dronabinol should be rescheduled to Schedule IV of the 1971 Convention.
However, no further procedural steps were taken. Therefore, the existing
critical review report was updated, including information from recent
scientific publications, to enable the Committee to finalize the process
of critical review.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Dronabinol is the main active principle of cannabis and has similar effects
on mood, perception and the cardiovascular system. The cannabis plant
contains a “natural mixture” of around 70 different cannabinoids, and also
contains flavonoids and terpenes, as well as many other substances. There-
fore the pharmacological properties of natural cannabis and dronabinol are
not identical.

Dependence potential
Animal studies have demonstrated that, like other drugs of abuse, dronabi-
nol acts as a drug reinforcer. Physical dependence, as shown by withdrawal
syndrome following chronic administration, has also been demonstrated.
Reinforcing effects and physical dependence have also been described in
human studies.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
The abuse of dronabinol is currently rare and there have been very few
specific reports of its occurrence. In response to the WHO questionnaires
only the United States mentioned instances of abuse of
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol. At present, the quantity produced by licit manufacture
is limited. In the United States, which is the major manufacturing country, the
abuse of dronabinol medicinal preparations is reported to be very low and
there are no reports of diversion of the pharmaceutical product.

Therapeutic usefulness
Dronabinol preparations have been used in a limited number of countries in
the treatment of nausea and vomiting associated with cancer chemotherapy
in patients who have failed to respond adequately to conventional anti-
emetic treatments and in the treatment of anorexia associated with weight
loss in patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). It has
also been indicated in the treatment of chronic pain (e.g. in multiple
sclerosis, neuropathic disorders and arthritis), neurological disorders and
appetite loss in cachexia, and is being evaluated for use in various other
clinical situations.

Recommendation
The Committee reconsidered the recommendation of the thirty-third Expert
Committee after considering the updated critical review report. The Com-
mittee concluded that dronabinol constitutes a substantial risk to public
health. However this risk is different from those related to cannabis —
controlled under the 1961 Convention. The substance has a moderate therapeu-
tic usefulness and as a result of continuing clinical research its medical use
is likely to increase. Therefore, the Committee recommended that dronabinol
(INN) and its stereoisomers should be rescheduled from Schedule II to
Schedule III of the 1971 Convention.
         To avoid legal and forensic chemical problems that may arise in some
countries when placing stereoisomers of the same substance under different control
systems, the Committee indicated that the recommendation pertains to all
stereoisomeric forms of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol as specified above.

2.1.2 Oripavine
Substance identification
Oripavine, 3-O-demethylthebaine, or
6,7,8,14-tetradehydro-4,5-alpha-epoxy-6-methoxy-17-methylmorphinan-3-ol
is a phenanthrene alkaloid contained
in species of the Papaver plant. It is a major metabolite of thebaine.

Previous review
Oripavine was pre-reviewed at the thirty-third meeting of the Expert Committee
in 2002 (3). The reason for pre-review in 2002 was that oripavine is
a substance that is convertible into thebaine, and because thebaine is in turn
convertible into morphine. Thebaine and morphine are both in Schedule I
of the 1961 Convention. Owing to uncertainties regarding the schedul-
ing of oripavine based on the additional possibility of applying the 1988
Convention (8), the Committee did not finalize this review at its thirty-
third meeting, but asked WHO for clarification of issues related to the
conversion of precursors into scheduled substances. Subsequent clarifica-
tion of these issues allowed the Committee to come to a conclusion at its
thirty-fourth meeting.

Recommendation
The Committee decided that oripavine is a substance that is easily convertible
into thebaine and other substances controlled in Schedule I of the 1961
Convention. Hence, the Committee recommended that oripavine be scheduled,
like the substances mentioned, in Schedule I of the 1961 Convention.

2.2   Other substances critically reviewed
2.2.1 Buprenorphine (INN)
Substance identification
Buprenorphine (INN) is chemically
21-cyclopropyl-7-alpha-[(S)-1-hydroxy-1,2,2-trimethylpropyl]-6,14-endo-ethano-6,7,8,14-tetrahydrooripavine
CAS 53152-21-9 for the hydrochloride; 52485-79-7 for the free base).

Previous review
In 1989, a decision of the United Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs
placed buprenorphine (INN) in Schedule III of the Convention on Psy-
chotropic Substances (1971 Convention). The decision followed the
recommendation of the Expert Committee on Drug Dependence at its
twenty-fifth meeting (9). During its thirty-second meeting in 2000 (7), the
Committee considered the question of the scheduling of buprenorphine
and recommended critical review of the substance, taking into account a
request by the INCB, as well as questions concerning the rationale for the
control of this substance under the 1971 Convention rather than the 1961
Single Convention.
       At its thirty-third meeting, the Committee commenced the critical review
of the scheduling of buprenorphine on the basis of a review document pro-
duced by the Secretariat (3). The Committee considered that buprenorphine
met the requirements both for scheduling in the 1961 Convention and for its
present scheduling in the 1971 Convention. However, taking any decision
was hindered by a lack of authoritative guidance on the choice between the
two possibilities. Therefore, the Expert Committee had to seek guidance for
its decision from the Conventions, from the existing guidelines and from an
appreciation of the impact of changes in the scheduling on public health.

New information since 2002
A document provided by the Secretariat for the thirty-fourth meeting of the
Committee indicated an expansion in the therapeutic role of buprenorphine.
Buprenorphine (and other medicines used in agonist pharmacotherapy of
opioid dependence, such as methadone) is recognized as an efficacious and
cost-effective treatment for opioid dependence. Buprenorphine maintenance
treatment programmes provide opportunities for human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV)/AIDS prevention among opioid-dependent injecting drug
users and also support the implementation of directly observed antiretro-
viral therapy (ART) for people with opioid dependence who also have HIV/
AIDS. Buprenorphine maintenance treatment programmes can also act as
a platform for promoting adherence to medical treatment of opportunistic
infections. Buprenorphine maintenance treatment was stated to be available
in about 30 countries. In March 2005, WHO included buprenorphine in
the 14th WHO Model List of Essential Medicines for use in opioid agonist
therapy of opioid dependence (10).
        Data were presented to the Committee demonstrating unique pharmaco-
logical actions of buprenorphine, which distinguish it from other opioids
controlled under the Single Convention. Specifically, buprenorphine is also
an agonist at the ORL-1 receptor in the brain, which affects its µ-opioid
actions. These new findings suggest that buprenorphine has a unique spec-
trum of pharmacological actions.
     There have been reports of diversion, seizures and abuse of buprenor-
phine in various countries. It was reported that in many instances
buprenorphine was being illegally used for alleviating symptoms of opioid
withdrawal.

Additional considerations
Additional documents presented to the Committee at its thirty-fourth meet-
ing dealt primarily with the possible effects of rescheduling buprenorphine
from the 1971 Convention to the 1961 Convention.
     The Committee was informed that this question had been discussed during
the 115th meeting of the WHO Executive Board. It was indicated during the
discussion that the transfer of substances from one convention to the other
would result in problems with implementation of the conventions in national
laws. A concern was expressed that transfer could consequently give rise to
rescheduling at the national level, which would have the unintended effect
of restricting access to buprenorphine for use in opioid agonist therapy. Of
the 56 countries that responded to the WHO questionnaire, 14 stated that
such a rescheduling would result in impeded access to treatment.
     The documents presented to the meeting also discussed the legal
considerations relating to the transfer of substances between conventions.
Taking into account the text of the Single Convention on narcotic drugs
and the United Nations Convention on psychotropic substances as well
as official commentaries to both Conventions and information included
in WHO guidelines for the review of dependence-producing psycho-
active substances for international control, it is advisable that a substance
should not be under more then one Convention. The WHO guidelines give
guidance for the scheduling of new drugs, not yet scheduled, and on the
choice between the Conventions for those drugs. They also give guidance
for the scheduling of drugs already in the 1988 Convention. However,
the guidelines do not give guidance on the transfer of a substance from
the 1961 to the 1971 Convention or vice versa. A transfer of a substance
from one Convention to the other would demand that the United Nations
Commission on Narcotic Drugs take a simultaneous decision on deletion of
a substance from one Convention and adding it to the appropriate schedule
of another Convention. A procedure for making a deletion from the
schedules of the 1971 Convention is included in article 2 para. 6 of
the Convention and requires a new assessment by WHO. A similar
provision is included in the 1961 Convention article 3 para. 6(b). No
provision is included, however, to indicate that these decisions are to be
taken simultaneously.

Discussion
In the course of the meeting, members of the Committee expressed their
views concerning various aspects of the current scheduling status of
buprenorphine and the possible consequences, including legal aspects, of
its rescheduling. It became evident that there were divergent views on the
legal situation related to the transfer of substances between Conventions.
The majority of the members considered however that the Expert Commit-
tee on Drug Dependence is not properly constituted to discuss legal issues
related to international treaties.

Recommendation
Following review of the documents presented at the present meeting, which
expanded the information made available at its thirty-third meeting, the
Committee considered the unique pharmacological actions of buprenor-
phine, and its expanded role in the treatment of opioid dependence. This
pharmacological treatment of opioid dependence also contributes to the
efficient prevention and treatment of HIV/AIDS among opioid-dependent
injecting drug users. Hence, the Committee did not recommend any change
in the present scheduling of the substance in Schedule III of the 1971
Convention.

2.2.2 Butorphanol (INN)
Substance identification
Butorphanol (INN) is chemically
(–)-17-(cyclobutylmethyl)morphinan-3,14-diol.

Previous review
Butorphanol was pre-reviewed by the Committee at its thirty-third meeting
in September 2002 (3). The Committee recommended a critical review
based on reports of abuse in some countries.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Butorphanol is a synthetic opioid partial agonist analgesic with proper-
ties similar to other µ-opioid agonists such as scheduled substances
buprenorphine and pentazocine. Although in radioligand-binding studies,
butorphanol binds to both µ- and κ-opioid receptors, most of the observed
behavioural, pharmacological and therapeutic effects appear to be due to its
µ-opioid receptor agonist activity. Early studies suggested that butorphanol
did not produce complete respiratory depressant effects and a “plateau” or
ceiling effect” was observed although more recent studies have challenged
this notion. Moderate adverse effects on the central nervous system such as
nausea/vomiting, headache, clamminess, sweatiness, asthenia, paraesthe-
sia, sedation, lethargy, anxiety, nervousness, euphoria, vertigo, dizziness,
floating feeling, confusion and light-headedness are often reported following
both parenteral and intranasal administration.

Dependence potential
Early preclinical studies in laboratory animals suggested that butorphanol
has lower abuse potential than full µ-agonists such as morphine. Human
studies have indicated that although the incidence of butorphanol dependence
is infrequent, the withdrawal symptoms are very similar to those
observed for morphine and buprenorphine. Information on the abuse potential
of the different formulations of butorphanol shows that, from a pharmacological
viewpoint, the trans-nasal preparation does not appear to differ in
its abuse liability from the parenteral preparations. However, other non-
pharmacological factors such as availability and pattern of use can play
critical roles in the likelihood of its abuse.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
Abuse and diversion have been reported by very few countries — only two
countries of the 74 that responded to the WHO questionnaire mentioned
abuse of butorphanol.

Therapeutic usefulness
Butorphanol is used medically in humans as an analgesic for the relief of
moderate-to-severe acute pain in certain specific conditions such as post-
surgical pain or migraine. Butorphanol was stated as being available for
medical use in 21 of the 74 countries that responded to the WHO questionnaire.
It is also used in veterinary medicine as an analgesic and antitussive agent.

Recommendation
After reviewing the information available, the Committee considered that
the level of abuse of butorphanol is low, limited to a few countries and does
not pose a risk to public health. Therefore, the Committee did not recommend
scheduling of butorphanol.

2.2.3 Ketamine (INN)
Substance identification
Ketamine (INN) is (±)-2-(o-chlorophenyl)-2-(methylamino)cyclohexanone.
It contains a chiral centre, resulting in two enantiomers: S-(+)-ketamine and
R-(–)-ketamine. Usually, the racemate is marketed but the more active
S-(+)-enantiomer is increasingly present in commercially available preparations.

Previous review
Ketamine was pre-reviewed by the Committee at its thirty-third meeting
and critical review was recommended on the basis of reports of abuse in
various countries (3).

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Ketamine is an arylcycloalkylamine structurally related to cyclidines such
as phencyclidine. It is a non-competitive NMDA-receptor antagonist that
affects the central nervous system, resulting in hallucinations, disturbances
in thinking, perception and motor function and may also produce mild re-
spiratory depression. It is used as an anaesthetic in both human and
veterinary medicine.

Dependence potential
Various animal models have shown that ketamine can produce a state of
dependence, but reports of such dependence in humans are very limited.
Tolerance may occur, but there is no evidence of a withdrawal syndrome.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
Abuse has been reported in a number of countries in the Americas, Asia and
Europe, sometimes in a mixture with other substances.

Therapeutic usefulness
Ketamine is widely used as an anaesthetic and analgesic in human and
veterinary medicine. Ketamine was stated as being available for medical use
in 70 out of the 74 countries that answered the WHO questionnaire. It is
included as a general anaesthetic in the 14th WHO Model List of Essential
Medicines (10).

Recommendation
The Committee reviewed the information contained in the critical review
document and concluded that this information was not sufficient to warrant
scheduling. However, in the course of the meeting, the Committee
was informed that the United Nations Commission for Narcotic Drugs at
its 49th session, held in March 2006, had adopted a draft resolution for
transmission to ECOSOC, on the listing of ketamine as a controlled substance
(11). The Committee requested the Secretariat to produce an updated
version of the critical review and present it to the next meeting of the Expert
Committee on Drug Dependence.

2.2.4 Khat (Catha edulis Forsk.)
Substance identification
Khat refers to the leaves and the young shoots of the plant Catha edulis
Forsk., a species belonging to the plant family Celastraceae. It is also written
and/or known as qat, q’at, kat, kath, gat, chat, tschat (Ethiopia), miraa
Kenya) and murungu. The dried leaves of khat are known as Abyssinian
tea or Arabian tea.

Previous review
Khat had been considered and reviewed by the Expert Committee many
years previously, and at its thirty-third meeting the Committee pre-reviewed
khat and concluded that there was sufficient information on this substance
to justify a critical review (3).

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
The major psychoactive compounds found in khat are cathinone and cathine
norpseudoephedrine), which are scheduled under the 1971 Convention,
and norephedrine, which is controlled under the 1988 Convention. The
plant contains only the (–)-enantiomer of cathinone, which has the same
absolute configuration as S-(+)-amphetamine. Use of khat produces a state
of euphoria and increased alertness. It can also produce insomnia and an
increase in blood pressure, heart rate and body temperature. Psychotic
reactions induced by khat use have also been reported.

Dependence potential
There is inconsistent data regarding the dependence potential of khat.
Withdrawal symptoms after prolonged use may include loss of energy, lethargy,
depressive feelings and slight trembling, but these symptoms are mild and
resolve rapidly. Some tolerance may also develop.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
Khat leaves are chewed habitually in the south-western part of the Arabian
Peninsula and in East Africa. However, khat chewing has spread to other
African countries and to Australia, Europe and the USA. Daily consump-
tion of khat may have negative effects on the social and economic life of the
user. Khat is used in social gatherings.

Therapeutic usefulness
No confirmed therapeutic usefulness has been identified for khat.

Recommendation
The Committee reviewed the data on khat and determined that the potential
for abuse and dependence is low. The level of abuse and threat to public
health is not significant enough to warrant international control. Therefore,
the Committee did not recommend the scheduling of khat.
    The Committee recognized that social and some health problems result
from the excessive use of khat and suggested that national educational
campaigns should be adopted to discourage use that may lead to these
adverse consequences.

2.2.5 Zopiclone (INN)
Substance identification
Zopiclone (INN) is chemically 4-methyl-1-piperazinecarboxylic acid
ester with
6-(5-chloro-2-pyridyl)-6,7-dihydro-7-hydroxy-5H-pyrrolo-3,4-b]pyrazin-5-one.
Zopiclone has one chiral centre and therefore
exists in two enantiomeric forms and a racemate. It is marketed under
many trade names. Eszopiclone is the S-(+)-enantiomer and has also
been marketed recently.

Previous review
Zopiclone was pre-reviewed by the Committee at its twenty-ninth meeting,
at which it recommended continued surveillance but not a critical
review (12). Zopiclone underwent pre-review at its thirty-third meeting and
the Committee recommended critical review based on its abuse liability and
the significant number of adverse drug reaction reports related to abuse,
received by the international drug monitoring programme (3).

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
The pharmacological properties of zopiclone are very similar to those of
benzodiazepines and are believed to be related to the binding to the
γ-amino-butyric acid (GABA)/benzodiazepine receptor complex. Zopiclone has a
sedative action on the central nervous system producing sedation, somno-
lence, fatigue and impairment of concentration. Other side-effects include
nausea, dizziness, headache, sweating, hallucinations and agitation.

Dependence potential
Zopiclone use can lead in some instances to dependence with associated
tolerance and withdrawal syndrome.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
Some abuse of zopiclone has been reported by six of the countries that
responded to the WHO questionnaire. In addition, abuse has been reported
as an adverse drug reaction to the WHO Programme for International Drug
Monitoring. Zopiclone has also been implicated in some cases of sexual
assault and robbery.

Therapeutic usefulness
Zopiclone is a widely prescribed hypnotic primarily used in the treatment
of insomnia. Zopiclone was stated as being available for medical use in 34
of the 59 countries that responded to the questions on this substance in the
WHO questionnaire.

Recommendation
On the basis of available data concerning the pharmacological profile
and dependence potential of zopiclone, the Committee rated the abuse
liability to be low, whereas the therapeutic usefulness is considerable.
The Committee therefore came to the conclusion that zopiclone does
not warrant international control and therefore did not recommend its
scheduling.

3.1    Pre-review of psychoactive substances
3.1.1   Gamma-hydroxybutyric acid
Discussion
Gamma-hydroxybutyric acid (GHB) was pre-reviewed by the
Committee at its thirty-first meeting (13) and critically reviewed at its thirty-
second meeting (7). It was recommended for inclusion in Schedule IV of
the 1971 Convention and since 2001 has been placed in this Schedule by a
decision of the United Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs.
         GHB is a naturally occurring compound found in very low concentrations
in mammalian tissues. It is considered to act by binding to GHB-specific
receptors and GABAB receptors. At pharmacological doses it acts as a central
nervous system depressant. In some countries, GHB is used clinically
as an anaesthetic agent and in the treatment of narcolepsy, narcolepsy with
cataplexy, alcohol withdrawal and myoclonus-dystonia. GHB can produce
physical dependence together with a withdrawal syndrome when the drug is
abruptly discontinued following regular, chronic use. The withdrawal syndrome
appears to be similar to that of other central nervous system depressants.
GHB and related products (gamma-butyrolactone and 1,4-butane-diol)
have been abused for their purported sexual performance-enhancing
and growth-promoting effects as well as their euphoric effects. There have
been reports of GHB being used to facilitate sexual assault. The toxicity
of GHB is dose-dependent and there have been numerous instances of
fatal and non-fatal GHB intoxication in many countries. The mode of abuse
frequently involves other substances such as
methylenedioxy-N-methylam-phetamine
(MDMA) and alcohol. Use and abuse of GHB appears to occur
mainly in Australia, Europe and the USA.

Recommendation
The Committee considered additional data regarding its abuse liability and
toxicity and recommended that a new critical review of GHB would be
appropriate to consider its possible rescheduling.

3.1.2   Tramadol (INN)
Discussion
Tramadol (INN) is
(±)-trans-2-[(dimethylamino)methyl]-1-(3-methoxy-phenyl)cyclohexanol.
It was critically reviewed at the thirty-third meet-
ing of the Committee in 2002, but the Committee decided that the
information available at that time was not sufficient to recommend
international control of tramadol, although it was adequate to
recommend that WHO keep the drug under surveillance (3). Subsequently, the
substance was presented by the WHO Secretariat for pre-review at the
present meeting.
        Tramadol is a centrally acting synthetic opioid analogue of codeine with
a weak affinity for the opioid receptors. It has additional monoaminergic
activity (serotonin and noradrenaline re-uptake inhibition and α2-adrenergic
stimulation) producing a combined analgesic effect. The O-desmethyl
metabolite is also pharmacologically active owing to significant µ-opioid
receptor affinity. Tramadol induces analgesia, but is associated with less
respiratory depression than other opioids and has no significant cardiac
effects. It has been found to reduce the seizure and sweating thresholds,
and to reduce postoperative shivering. Subjective effects include euphoria.
Reported adverse effects have included: dizziness, headache, agitation,
nausea, vomiting and seizures. Overdose has been reported to result in
tachycardia, convulsions, respiratory depression and coma. Other central-
nervous-system depressant or monoamine antidepressant compounds may
exacerbate any toxic effects. There have been some reported instances of
non-fatal and fatal tramadol intoxication worldwide, but these are few in
comparison to total patient exposure.
           Preclinical studies in animals indicated that tramadol may have a low
abuse potential. Clinical studies and postmarketing surveillance programmes
have found a possibility of dependence and abuse, particularly
in patients with a previous history of opioid dependence or abuse. Post-
marketing surveillance programmes have shown a rate of abuse of
0.5–1 per 100 000 patients (1997–2003). This figure included generic
products since 2002 and tramadol with paracetamol combinations during
1997–2003.
        Data from various monitoring organizations reported some instances of
smuggling and diversion but did not show any increasing trend in tramadol
abuse and there was no evidence of illicit manufacture.

Recommendation
Following review of the documents presented at the present meeting, which
expanded the information made available at the thirty-third meeting, the
Committee considered that, even after a recent major increase in the extent
of its use because of its therapeutic usefulness, tramadol continues to show
a low level of abuse. Hence, the Committee concluded that there was not
sufficient evidence to justify a critical review.
