
3.1       Substance recommended for change in scheduling
3.1.1 γ-Hydroxybutyric acid (GHB)
Substance identification and pharmacodynamics
γ-Hydroxybutyric acid (GHB), also known as 4-hydroxybutanoic acid and
sodium oxybate, is a naturally occurring substance found in low concentrations in
mammalian tissues. It is considered to act by binding to GHB-specific receptors
and γ-aminobutyric acid B (GABAB) receptors. At pharmacological doses it acts
as a central nervous system depressant.

Previous reviews
GHB was pre-reviewed during the thirty-first (15) and thirty-second (16)
meetings, held in 1998 and 2000, respectively. In 2001, GHB was placed in
Schedule IV of the 1971 Convention by a decision of the CND. It was again
pre-reviewed at the thirty-fourth ECDD meeting in 2006 (6), at which time the
Expert Committee recommended a new critical review to consider its possible
rescheduling.

Evidence on dependence potential
The Expert Committee examined additional information from the updated
critical review report and peer-review reports. The Expert Committee noted that
there is compelling evidence that dependence on GHB exists in humans and
noted withdrawal syndromes and withdrawal seizures.

Actual abuse
The Expert Committee noted that at present, GHB appears to be mainly used and
abused in the United States of America, Europe and Australia. Most GHB used
illicitly originates from clandestine manufacture.
In their discussions, the Expert Committee and advisers agreed on the narrow
margin of safety of GHB. There have been numerous reports from Europe and
the United States of accidental fatal and non-fatal overdoses where GHB was
implicated, both when used alone and with other substances.
The Expert Committee also noted there have been reports of GHB being used to
facilitate sexual assault.

Therapeutic usefulness
GHB is used as a medicine in some countries on a small scale for various
indications. GHB is not included in the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines
(17).

Need for the substance for other purposes (e.g., industrial)
The Expert Committee acknowledged the use of GHB in the production of a
wide variety of industrial polymers.

Measures taken by countries to curb abuse
The Expert Committee was made aware of measures taken by 30 out of the
51 countries that responded to the questionnaire circulated by WHO in 2008
in preparation for the meeting. For example, Norway is planning to implement
legal limits for driving under the influence of non-alcohol drugs including GHB.
In the United States, GHB (Xyrem®) is available for the treatment of narcolepsy
in association with an extensive risk management programme. Postmarketing
data from this programme show minimal abuse or diversion of this product. The
Netherlands recently re-assessed the risk potential of GHB and found it to be
moderate to high. On this basis GHB was upgraded to List 1 (hard drugs) of the
Dutch Opium Act.

Recommendation
The Expert Committee considered the implications of rescheduling this substance.
On the basis of available data on its toxicity and dependence potential, the Committee
rated the abuse liability of GHB to be substantial, whereas the therapeutic usefulness
is little to moderate. The Committee therefore came to the conclusion that GHB
should be moved from Schedule IV to Schedule II of 1971 Convention.

3.2       Other substance critically reviewed
3.2.1 Ketamine (INN)
Substance identification
Ketamine (INN) is (±)-2-(o-chlorophenyl)-2-(methylamino)-cyclohexanone.
It contains a chiral centre, resulting in two enantiomers: S-(+)-ketamine and
R-(–)-ketamine. Usually, the racemate is marketed, but the more active S-(+)-
enantiomer is increasingly present in commercially available preparations.

Previous reviews
During its thirty-third meeting in September 2002, the ECDD pre-reviewed
ketamine (18). Based on the available information, a recommendation was
made for a critical review of this substance. During its thirty-fourth meeting,
the ECDD discussed the critical review report on ketamine and concluded that
this information was not sufficient to warrant scheduling (6). The Committee
therefore requested the Secretariat to produce an updated version of the critical
review for the thirty-fifth meeting.

Evidence on dependence potential
Ketamine may produce dependence in animal models, but reports of dependence
in humans are rare and largely limited to health-care professionals with access to
ketamine. The short duration of action makes it difficult to maintain intoxication
for sustained periods. Tolerance may occur, but there is insufficient evidence to
show that ketamine causes a withdrawal syndrome in humans.

Actual abuse
Information on ketamine is not routinely collected in population surveys and
morbidity and mortality data collection systems. Levels of use in the general
population, however, appear to be very low with higher levels in groups with
access to the substance (e.g., medical and veterinarian professionals) and party
drug users. Ketamine is difficult to synthesize, so illicit production is rare in most
countries. However, representatives of the INCB and United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) reported that illicit production of ketamine is of
increasing concern in China and India. China reported an increase in the chronic
use of ketamine among young adults, particularly in Macao and Hong Kong.
The chronic use of ketamine was associated with urinary tract dysfunction. In
the United States, a national survey of schoolchildren showed that ketamine use
has remained very low and steady since 2007, and data from hospital emergency
departments suggest that ketamine-related visits constitute fewer than one out of
every 2000 visits caused by illicit drug use per year.

Therapeutic usefulness
Ketamine is widely used as an anaesthetic in human and veterinary medicine,
and is included in the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines (17) and WHO
Model List of Essential Medicines for Children (19). Compelling evidence was
presented about the prominent place of ketamine as an anaesthetic in developing
countries, particularly in Africa. The ease of parenteral administration gives
ketamine a major advantage when anaesthetic gases are impossible to use due
to limited equipment and a lack of appropriately trained specialists. In many
countries there are no suitable alternatives that are affordable.

Recommendation
Ketamine is a widely used anaesthetic, especially in developing countries,
because it is easy to use and has a wide margin of safety when compared with
other anaesthetic agents. While the Expert Committee acknowledged the concerns
raised by some countries and UN organizations, ketamine abuse currently does
not appear to pose a significant global public-health risk. Concerns were raised
that if ketamine were placed under international control, this would adversely
impact its availability and accessibility. This in turn would limit access to
essential and emergency surgery, which would constitute a public-health crisis
in countries where no affordable alternative anaesthetic is available. On this
basis, the Expert Committee decided that bringing ketamine under international
control is not appropriate. Furthermore, it noted that some countries have already
placed this medicine under control. Countries with serious abuse problems may
decide to maintain control measures, but should ensure ready access to ketamine
for surgery and anaesthesia for human and veterinary care.

4.1.1       Dextromethorphan (pINN)
Discussion
Dextromethorphan is (+)-3-methoxy-17-methyl-(9α,13α,14α)-morphinan. During
the fourth meeting of the ECDD in 1953 (then: Expert Committee on Drugs
Liable to Produce Addiction), the synthetic substances of the morphinan type,
including dextromethorphan, were discussed (20). After reviewing the worldwide
reports at that time, the Expert Committee concluded that dextromethorphan
has no morphine-like actions, lacks the ability to sustain morphine dependence,
and exhibited no signs of dependence liability. Therefore, the Expert Committee
recommended against placing dextromethorphan under control of the Conventions.
In order to update the scientific evidence on dextromethorphan, a member of the
Expert Committee proposed that it be pre-reviewed.
       Dextromethorphan is the d-isomer of the codeine analogue methorphan; however,
unlike the l-isomer, it does not act through opioid receptors. Dextromethorphan
binds with high affinity to sites associated with sigma ligands and low affinity
to the phencyclidine (PCP) binding site of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)
receptor. The relationship of these receptor binding sites to the pharmacological
mechanism of the antitussive effects of dextromethorphan is not known.
Dextromethorphan produces PCP-like discriminative stimulus effects in rats and
partial substitution for PCP in monkeys probably produced by the metabolite
dextrorphan. Dextromethorphan can alter self-administration of several
substances of abuse such as morphine, cocaine, and methamphetamine. Few data
exist on dextromethorphan dependence, with only a handful of cases described
in scientific literature. Cases of abuse of dextromethorphan have been reported
in several countries. However, these reports are still relatively infrequent.
Dextromethorphan is produced commercially in many regions of the world,
but synthesis is a complex and time-consuming process, making clandestine
production impractical. Dextromethorphan is widely used as an antitussive in
many over-the-counter and prescription-only preparations.

Recommendation
Following review of the documents presented at the thirty-fifth meeting, the Expert
Committee concluded that the abuse potential of dextromethorphan is relatively low,
intoxications are rare, and reports of dependence are infrequent. Dextromethorphan
is widely used as an antitussive agent and placing it under international control
could negatively impact its availability for medical use. On this basis, the Expert
Committee concluded that a critical review is not warranted at this time.

4.1.2     Tapentadol (INN)
Discussion
Tapentadol is 3-[(1R,2R)-3-(dimethylamino)-1-ethyl-2-methylpropyl]-phenol
hydrochloride. Tapentadol has two chiral centres and is manufactured as a single
(R,R) stereoisomer. Tapentadol shares a 3-(3-hydroxyphenyl)propylamino
structural fragment with morphine and its analogues. It is a novel analgesic agent
with activity at the μ-opioid receptor and norepinephrine reuptake inhibition.
Immediate release and extended release formulations of tapentadol are indicated
for analgesia. Tapentadol demonstrates improved gastrointestinal tolerability
(specifically in the incidence of nausea, vomiting, and constipation) compared
with strong opioids at doses providing similar analgesia. Dependence has been
demonstrated in animal models, but the level of dependence relative to morphine
is not known. Mild withdrawal was observed in clinical trials submitted for the
initial approval of tapentadol. Tapentadol has only been marketed since 2009
and therefore has not appeared in many substance use surveys or surveillance
reports. Overall, toxicity for tapentadol does not appear to be greater than that for
other μ-opioid receptor agonists. In the 3 years since tapentadol was launched in
the United States, analyses of postmarketing surveillance data show lower abuse
than oxycodone and slightly higher abuse than tramadol. The Expert Committee
noted that tapentadol has been scheduled or recommended for scheduling in
Australia, Germany, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Switzerland, the United
States and the United Kingdom.

Recommendation
Given the action of tapentadol at the μ-opioid receptor, together with some evidence
of abuse, the Expert Committee recommended that a critical review be conducted.

4.3       Piperazines
4.3.1     N-Benzylpiperazine (BZP)
Discussion
N-Benzylpiperazine (BZP) is 1-benzylpiperazine. It is a piperazine derivative
with stimulant properties (including euphoria). Animal studies have shown that
BZP stimulates the release and inhibits the reuptake of dopamine, serotonin and
noradrenaline, but dopaminergic and serotonergic effects predominate. In studies,
BZP was found to be less potent than methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA),
methamphetamine or amphetamine. BZP has never been licensed as a medicine but was
found to be an active metabolite of a proposed anti-depressant (piberaline, a product
that was later not marketed). Abuse was first reported in the late 1990s in the USA and
Scandinavia but has since been reported in other countries (particularly in Australia,
Europe and New Zealand). The behavioural effects of BZP include amphetamine-
like effects. Many suppliers of BZP market the substance as “legal ecstasy” or as a
“legal high”. Such products typically contain other piperazine derivatives in variable
quantities. Toxic effects have been reported (agitation, tachycardia and seizures) with
associated hospital admissions, but cases involving BZP alone are rare. Although BZP
has been found in substance-related deaths, in the vast majority of instances, other
commonly abused substances were also present; therefore the role of BZP in these
deaths is unclear.

Recommendation
Based on the reported psychostimulant effects, evidence of abuse, and adverse effects,
the Expert Committee concluded that a critical review of N-benzylpiperazine is
warranted.

4.3.2     1-(3-Trifluoromethylphenyl)piperazine (TFMPP)
Discussion
1-(3-Trifluoromethylphenyl)piperazine (TFMPP) is a piperazine derivative with mild
stimulant effects and hallucinogenic properties. TFMPP has never been licensed as a
medicine but is a known metabolite of a previously used anti-inflammatory analgesic
(antrafenine). Its use was first reported in the late 1990s in Scandinavia and the
United States along with BZP, but has since been reported in various other countries
(particularly Europe and New Zealand). Many suppliers of TFMPP market the
substance as “legal ecstasy” or as a “legal high”. Such products typically contain other
piperazine derivatives in variable quantities. Very few user reports involving the use
of TFMPP alone have been documented. However, the toxic effects reported include:
nausea, hallucinations and slight tremors. Hospital admissions have occurred, but all
involved other substances (including piperazines). Although TFMPP has been found
in drug-related deaths, in the vast majority of instances, other substances of abuse were
also present; therefore the role of TFMPP in these deaths is unclear. Animal studies
have indicated that TFMPP is unlikely to possess abuse or dependence potential, but
there are no human clinical studies to support this.

Recommendation
1-(3-Trifluoromethylphenyl)piperazine does not appear to have abuse and
dependence potential. On this basis, the Expert Committee decided that a critical
review is not warranted at this time.

4.3.3   1-(3-Chlorophenyl)piperazine (mCPP)
Discussion
1-(3-Chlorophenyl)piperazine (mCPP) is a piperazine derivative with stimulant
(including euphoric) and hallucinogenic properties. mCPP has never been
licensed as a medicine but is a known metabolite of some antidepressants and is
a tranquillizer. Its use was first reported in the mid-2000s across Europe but has
since been reported in various other countries (e.g., the United States). mCPP is
sometimes sold as “legal ecstasy” or as a “legal high” or as “ecstasy” itself. Such
products can contain other piperazine derivatives as well as other psychoactive
substances including MDMA. Very few user reports involving the use of mCPP
alone have been documented. However, the toxic effects reported include:
nausea, hallucinations, headache and most frequently, anxiety and panic attacks.
There are no published reports of non-fatal or fatal hospital admissions. In
Europe, a few cases reported to monitoring centres have mentioned hot flushes,
some respiratory problems and coma, but all these cases also involved other
unspecified substances. No specific studies have been performed to determine
the abuse or dependence potential of mCPP but, in animal discrimination studies,
it has been found to mimic TFMPP, ethanol and MDMA, but not lysergic acid
diethylamide (LSD). Its abuse and dependence potential in humans is unclear.

Recommendation
The Expert Committee considered the information contained in the pre-review, and
found that there is a paucity of data on 1-(3-chlorophenyl)piperazine. Furthermore
its abuse and dependence potential in humans remains unclear. On this basis, the
Expert Committee concluded that a critical review is not warranted at this time.

4.3.4   1-(4-Methoxyphenyl)piperazine (MeOPP)
Discussion
1-(4-Methoxyphenyl)piperazine (MeOPP) is a piperazine derivative that appears
to have mild stimulant effects (including euphoria) and some hallucinogenic
properties. Very little information is available on this substance. MeOPP has
never been licensed as a medicine. The first report of seized material containing
MeOPP appeared in 2006 in the United Kingdom. Many suppliers market the
substance as “legal ecstasy” or as a “legal high”. Such products typically contain
other piperazine derivatives in variable quantities. There are no published reports
of non-fatal or fatal hospital admissions. No specific studies have been performed
to determine the abuse or dependence potential.

Recommendation
Given the limited information available, and the current lack of evidence
of abuse, the Expert Committee recommended that a critical review for
1-(4-methoxyphenyl)piperazine not be conducted at this time.

4.3.5     1-(3,4-Methylenedioxybenzyl)piperazine (MDBP)
Discussion
1-(3,4-Methylenedioxybenzyl)piperazine (MDBP or MDBZP) is a piperazine
derivative but its effects are largely unknown. MDBP has never been licensed
as a medicine but is a metabolite of a withdrawn nootropic medicine, fipexide.
This medicine was withdrawn because it had adverse toxic effects (fever and
hepatotoxicity). Use of MDBP has been noted by governmental organizations
in the United States but there are no reports from other countries. There are no
published reports of non-fatal or fatal hospital admissions. No specific studies
have been performed to determine the abuse or dependence potential of MDBP.

Recommendation
Based on the lack of animal, human clinical, and epidemiological data on the abuse
and dependence potential of MDBP, the Expert Committee did not recommend a
critical review of 1-(3,4-methylene-dioxybenzyl) piperazine at this time.

4.4.1       γ-Butyrolactone (GBL)
Discussion
γ-Butyrolactone (GBL) is oxolan-2-one. The pre-review of GBL was decided
on the basis that GBL can be readily converted both chemically and in the body
to GHB. GHB is a controlled substance under the 1971 Convention, and was
subject to a critical review at the thirty-fifth meeting of the ECDD. The Expert
Committee discussed GBL in the context of GHB and 1,4-butanediol (1,4-BD),
another precursor of GHB, see sections 3.1 and 4.5. GBL is widely used as a
solvent and reagent in the chemical industry. Since the end of the 1990s, reports
of abuse of GBL have emerged, mainly from Australia, Europe and the United
States. The epidemiology of the abuse of GBL is intrinsically linked to that
of GHB since GBL is rapidly metabolized to GHB. A few deaths have been
documented, but owing to the rapid metabolism it is difficult to establish whether
GHB, GBL or 1,4-BD was consumed. Several cases of withdrawal from GBL,
1,4-BD and GHB have been documented. The new controls rapidly curtailed the
previously open sale of GHB. This may also help to explain the emergent use of
GBL, which does not currently fall under the controls of the international drug
control convention. In view of concerns about the diversion of GBL and 1,4-BD
for conversion to GHB, some Member States have chosen to control GBL, 1,4-
BD, or both, under drug control or equivalent legislation and voluntary measures
to prevent diversion.

Recommendation
Based on the evidence presented in the pre-review of GBL, its close association
with GHB, and the recommendation made by the Expert Committee to reschedule
GHB from Schedule IV to Schedule II of the 1971 Convention, the Committee
recommended that a critical review of GBL be undertaken.

4.5.1     1,4-Butanediol (1,4-BD)
Discussion
The pre-review of 1,4-BD was conducted on the basis that 1,4-BD can be
readily converted both chemically and in the body to GHB. GHB is a controlled
substance under the 1971 Convention, and was subject to a critical review at
the thirty-fifth meeting of the ECDD. The Expert Committee discussed 1,4-
BD in the context of GHB and GBL, another precursor of GHB, see
sections 3.1 and 4.4. 1,4-BD is an industrial chemical and an important raw material
widely used in the chemical, pharmaceutical, textile, paper making, and motor
vehicle industries. Starting in the 1990s, it is believed that national controls on
GHB prompted substitution of 1,4-BD and GBL for GHB as drugs of abuse. The
epidemiology of the abuse of 1,4-BD is intrinsically linked to that of GHB since
1,4-BD is rapidly metabolized to GHB. A few deaths have been documented,
but owing to the rapid metabolism it is difficult to establish whether GHB, GBL
or 1,4-BD was consumed. It appears to be mainly used and abused in Australia,
Europe, and the United States. The new controls rapidly curtailed the previously
open sale of GHB. They may also help to explain the emergent use of 1,4-BD,
which does not currently fall under the controls of the international drug control
convention. In view of concerns about the diversion of GBL and 1,4-BD for
conversion to GHB, some Member States have chosen to control GBL, 1,4-BD,
or both, under drug control or equivalent legislation and voluntary measures to
prevent diversion.

Recommendation
Based on the evidence presented in the pre-review of 1,4-BD, its close association
with GHB, and the recommendation made by the Expert Committee to reschedule
GHB from Schedule IV to Schedule II of the 1971 Convention, the Committee
recommended that a critical review of 1,4-BD be undertaken.
