
5.1.1     MT-45
Substance identification
Chemically, MT-45 is 1-cyclohexyl-4-(1,2-diphenylethyl)piperazine. MT-45 has
two enantiomers and is commonly available as the racemic mixture.

Previous review
MT-45 has not been previously reviewed by the Committee. A critical review
was proposed based on information brought to WHO’s attention that MT-45 is
clandestinely manufactured, poses a risk to public health and society, and has no
recognized therapeutic use by any Party.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Structurally, MT-45 is somewhat similar to lefetamine (SPA; (R)-N,N-dimethyl-
1,2-diphenylethylamine), a stimulant with analgesic effects, that is controlled as
a Schedule IV drug under the UN 1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances,
but conversion into SPA is considered difficult.
         MT-45 (the racemate) binds to the µ-, δ-, and κ-opioid receptors
and has many of the effects of a classical opioid such as morphine. It inhibits
electrically induced contractions of the guinea-pig ileum, it has antinociceptive
effects in thermal, mechanical, electrical and chemical pain models. It reduces
gastrointestinal transit time, depresses respiration, produces Straub tail in mice
and induces hyperglycaemia. The isomers show subtle differences. The S(+)-
isomer produces most of the morphine-like effects whereas the R(−)-isomer
has been reported not to depress respiration, produce Straub tail, or to have
hyperglycaemic effects, and it has a 1000-fold higher affinity for both the σ1 and
σ2 receptors than for the opioid receptors.

Dependence potential
Regarding MT-45’s ability to induce physical dependence, the mixed opioid
agonist-antagonist, nalorphine, is able to precipitate opioid-like withdrawal
jumping in MT-45-treated mice, suggestive of physical dependence. MT-45 is
also able to attenuate signs of morphine withdrawal in mice thus demonstrating
cross-dependency with morphine. Controlled studies examining the potential
physical dependence effects of MT-45 in human subjects have not been reported;
however, user websites contain reports of withdrawal-like symptoms following
use of MT-45.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
MT-45 is being abused for non-medical reasons in several countries, most often
apparently for its opioid-like effects. Recognizing the abuse of this drug and its
associated toxicity, several European countries have brought MT-45 under some
level of regulatory control. Additionally, the Synthetic Drug Control Act of 2015
is currently circulating the United States legislature, and that is also proposing
to place MT-45 in the most restrictive schedule under the United States system.
Scholarly reports documenting the prevalence and incidence of abuse of MT-45
are not available and neither are any primary preclinical studies pertinent to the
prediction of the likelihood of abuse of MT-45 other than to physical dependence.
Fatal and non-fatal intoxications involving MT-45 have been reported.

Therapeutic usefulness
There are no known approved human therapeutic applications for MT-45.

Recommendation
MT-45 is a compound with morphine-like effects. The Committee considered
that the degree of risk to public health and society associated with the abuse
liability and accompanying evidence warranted its placement under international
control. Therapeutic use in humans has not been recorded. The Committee
recommended that MT-45 be placed in Schedule I of the 1961 Single Convention,
as amended by the 1972 Protocol.

5.1.2     Acetylfentanyl
Substance identification
Chemically, acetylfentanyl is N-phenyl-N-[1-(2-phenylethyl)-4-piperidinyl]
acetamide. It is in the phenylpiperidine class of synthetic opioids that includes
fentanyl, a Schedule I drug under the UN 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs. Acetylfentanyl has also been referred to as “desmethyl fentanyl”.

Previous review
Acetylfentanyl has not been previously reviewed by the Committee. A critical
review was proposed based on information brought to WHO’s attention that
acetylfentanyl is clandestinely manufactured, poses a risk to public health and
society, and has no recognized therapeutic use by any Party.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Acetylfentanyl displaces 3H-etorphine binding in rat cerebral membrane and can
completely inhibit the mouse vas deferens stimulated twitch, which is reduced
to 29.3 (±2.1)% levels by the µ-opioid receptor antagonist, beta-funaltrexamine,
and reversed by an equimolar concentration of naltrexone. Overall, these data
indicate that acetylfentanyl is a µ-opioid receptor agonist similar to morphine.
Also similar to morphine-like µ-opioid receptor agonists, it has antinociceptive
effects in several rodent models.

Dependence potential
Studies on physical dependence in animals have found that acetylfentanyl can
relieve signs of withdrawal in morphine-dependent rhesus monkeys and thus
demonstrates cross-dependency to morphine. There have been no published
reports involving human subjects and acetylfentanyl under controlled conditions
on the primary physical dependence-inducing effects, or the cross-dependency
effects of acetylfentanyl.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
Published reports involving controlled studies with acetylfentanyl in
directly relevant abuse-liability procedures such as self-administration, drug
discrimination, intra-cranial self-stimulation, or conditioned place preference are
not currently available. Acetylfentanyl is being used for non-medical purposes,
although the incidence and prevalence of its abuse cannot be accurately estimated
partly because it is not routinely tested for in forensic toxicology. It has been
identified in confiscated material being trafficked illicitly in the United States,
Europe and Japan where it has been found as a white or pale-beige powder, in
tablets and in nasal sprays, and in one report on blotting paper. At least eight
countries have brought acetylfentanyl under some level of control as an abused
substance. Users have reported using acetylfentanyl via insufflation, smoking,
and through the intravenous routes of administration. It is sold over the Internet
where it is sometimes promoted as a “research chemical”, and its use is discussed
on drug-user websites. Preclinical studies indicate that there is a narrow margin of
safety for acetylfentanyl. More than 50 fatal intoxications involving acetylfentanyl
have been reported from the United States, across Europe and from Japan.

Therapeutic usefulness
There are no known approved medical products containing acetylfentanyl, nor
are there any known industrial uses for the drug.

Recommendation
Acetylfentanyl has effects similar to those of morphine and fentanyl that are
included in Schedule I of the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs. It has
no recorded therapeutic use and its use has resulted in fatalities. Thus, because it
meets the required condition of similarity, it is recommended that acetylfentanyl
be placed in Schedule I of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961, as
consistent with Article 3, paragraph 3 (iii) of that convention in that the substance
is liable to similar abuse and productive of similar ill-effects to drugs in Schedule
I. In addition, in accordance with Article 3, paragraph 5 of that convention,
considering acetylfentanyl is particularly liable to abuse and to produce ill-effects,
and its liability is not offset by substantial therapeutic advantages not possessed
by substances other than drugs in Schedule IV, it is further recommended it be
included in Schedule IV of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961.

5.1.3     α-Pyrrolidinovalerophenone (α-PVP)
Substance identification
Chemically, α-PVP (α-pyrrolidinovalerophenone) is 1-phenyl-2-(pyrrolidin-
1-yl)pentan-1-one. This synthetic cathinone is the desmethyl analogue
of pyrovalerone that is listed in Schedule IV of the 1971 United Nations
Convention on Psychotropic Substances. α-PVP has two enantiomers and
is commonly available as the racemic mixture. α-PVP is closely related to
3′,4′-methylenedioxypyrovalerone (MDPV) that has recently been placed in
Schedule II of the UN Convention on Psychotropic Substances (1971).

Previous review
α-PVP has not been previously reviewed by the Committee. A direct critical
review was proposed based on information brought to WHO’s attention that
α-PVP is clandestinely manufactured, poses a risk to public health and society,
and has no recognized therapeutic use by any Party.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
α-PVP is a potent blocker at the dopamine transporter (DAT) and a moderate
blocker at the norepinephrine transporter (NET) with negligible activity at
the serotonin transporter (SERT), similar to some other psychostimulants. In
many preclinical procedures it demonstrates a psychostimulant-like profile in
which it increases locomotion, produces stereotypies, fully substitutes for the
discriminative stimulus effects of cocaine and methamphetamine, decreases
intracranial self-stimulation thresholds, produces conditioned place preference
and is self-administered.

Dependence potential
Research data using human subjects pertinent to α-PVP’s dependence potential
have not been reported. In preclinical studies, behavioural effects induced by
α-PVP are comparable to those produced by other psychomotor stimulants
such as cocaine, methamphetamine and MDPV, which predict a stimulant-like
dependence potential.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
Several of the nonclinical effects of α-PVP predict a likelihood of abuse for
α-PVP in that it decreases intracranial self-stimulation thresholds, produces
conditioned place preference, and is self-administered. α-PVP has been sold as
a “research chemical”, “bath salt”, “stain remover”, “plant food”, “plant fertilizer”,
“insect repellent”, and “jewellery cleaner” and in the form of tablets, suppositories,
ampoules, and in liquid formulations. The European Monitoring Centre for
Drugs and Drug Addiction (EMCDDA) identified 65 Internet vendors of α-PVP
including some presumably based in China, the European Union, India, the
Russian Federation and the United States. α-PVP has been associated with both
non-fatal and fatal intoxications. Frequently, when analysed, α-PVP is identified
in biofluids, accompanied by other abused substances. In cases where α-PVP use
has been established unambiguously, neurological, psychiatric and cardiovascular
effects consistent with an extensive psychostimulant toxidrome have been
observed, which include cardiotoxicity and violent and psychotic behaviour.
More than 130 deaths have been associated with α-PVP, and hospitalizations
were required among users with non-fatal acute intoxications.

Therapeutic usefulness
There are no known approved medical products containing α-PVP.

Recommendation
The Committee considered that the degree of risk to public health and society
associated with the abuse of α-PVP is substantial. Therapeutic usefulness has
not been recorded. Its pharmacological effects are similar to methamphetamine
and MDPV, psychostimulants listed in Schedule II of the 1971 Convention. The
Committee considered that the evidence of its abuse warranted its placement
under international control. As per the Guidance on the WHO review of
psychoactive substances for international control (4), higher regard was accorded
to the substantial public health risk than to the lack of therapeutic usefulness.
The Committee recommended that α-PVP be placed in Schedule II of the 1971
Convention.

5.1.4     4-Fluoroamphetamine (4-FA)
Substance identification
Chemically, 4-fluoroamphetamine (4-FA) is 1-(4-fluorophenyl)propan-2-amine.
4-FA has two enantiomers and is commonly available as the racemic mixture.

Previous review
4-FA has not been previously reviewed by the Committee. A critical review
was proposed based on information brought to WHO’s attention that 4-FA is
clandestinely manufactured, poses a risk to public health and society, and has no
recognized therapeutic use by any Party.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
4-FA is a ring-substituted analogue of amphetamine. Similar to amphetamine,
4-FA functions as a substrate of monoamine transporters and a releasing agent
of dopamine (DA), norepinephrine (NE) and 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT).
Similarly to amphetamine, it increases locomotor activity in rodents and it
displays amphetamine-like discriminative stimulus effects.

Dependence potential
There are no data from clinical studies in humans regarding the dependence
potential of 4-FA.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
In animal studies, 4-FA occasions the discriminative stimulus effects of
amphetamine suggesting that it would be likely to produce amphetamine’s
subjective effects. 4-FA is also self-administered by rhesus monkeys but with
reportedly lower efficacy than d-amphetamine. There are no controlled human
studies addressing the abuse potential of 4-FA. 4-FA has been found in seized
products in Europe since 2007, in products sold as “ecstasy” tablets and as
“amphetamine” powder, as well as as an adulterant in other illicit controlled
substances. Although 4-FA has been detected in some fatal and non-fatal
instances, other drugs were also present or else data to allow assessment were
limited. Therefore evidence for the direct role of 4-FA is not compelling.

Therapeutic usefulness
4-FA has never been marketed as a medicinal product.

Recommendation
Owing to the current insufficiency of data regarding dependence, abuse and risks
to public health (including risks to the individual), the Committee recommended
that 4-FA not be placed under international control at this time, but be kept under
surveillance.

5.1.5     para-Methyl-4-methylaminorex (4,4′-DMAR)
Substance identification
Chemically, 4,4′-DMAR (para-methyl-4-methylaminorex) is 4-methyl-5-
(4-methylphenyl)-4,5-dihydro-1,3-oxazol-2-amine. 4,4′-DMAR has four
enantiomers and exists as racemic cis- or trans- forms. It is a synthetic substituted
oxazoline derivative interpretable as an analogue of 4-methylaminorex (4-MAR)
and aminorex, which are psychostimulants listed as Schedule I and Schedule
IV substances, respectively, under the 1971 United Nations Convention on
Psychotropic Substances.

Previous review
4,4′-DMAR has not been previously reviewed by WHO. A critical review was
proposed based on information brought to WHO’s attention that 4,4′-DMAR is
clandestinely manufactured, poses a risk to public health and society, and has no
recognized therapeutic use by any Party.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
In in vitro studies, cis-4,4′-DMAR demonstrates comparable potency to
d-amphetamine and aminorex (which are scheduled under the 1971 United
Nations Convention on Psychotropic Substances) to induce release of DA and
NE, but with greater potency than those compounds to release 5-HT via their
respective transporters. trans-4,4′-DMAR is also a fully efficacious releasing
agent at the DAT and NET, but it acts as an uptake blocker at SERT. Currently,
there are no published reports of clinical studies involving 4,4′-DMAR.

Dependence potential
There are no published animal or human studies that have examined the
dependence and abuse potential of 4,4′-DMAR.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
A seizure of 4,4′-DMAR was first reported in December 2012 in the Netherlands.
Subsequently, use and seizures were reported in a number of other European
countries. 4,4′-DMAR has been encountered as a “research chemical”, in
powdered and tablet form, and has been surreptitiously sold as “ecstasy” or other
psychostimulant drugs. A total of 32 analytically confirmed deaths associated with
4,4′-DMAR have been reported. 4,4′-DMAR was found to contribute to the cause
of death in a number of cases, despite the detection of one or more psychoactive
substances and/or their metabolites in postmortem biological samples.

Therapeutic usefulness
There are currently no therapeutic applications for 4,4′-DMAR. Patent
applications have been filed for some of its isomers that describe their uses as
ligands for the trace amine associated receptor 1 (TAAR1) related to a range
of potential applications to central nervous system disorders, and the (4S, 5S)-
trans-4,4′-DMAR enantiomer has been featured in several patents related to the
preparation of a range of phospholipase A2 inhibitors. There are no marketing
authorizations (existing, ongoing or suspended) for 4,4′-DMAR.

Recommendation
As per the Guidance on the WHO review of psychoactive substances for international
control (4), higher regard was accorded to the substantial public health risk than
to the lack of therapeutic usefulness. The Committee considered that the degree
of risk to public health and society associated with the abuse of 4,4′-DMAR is
substantial. The Committee recommended that 4,4′-DMAR be placed in Schedule
II of the 1971 Convention.

5.1.6     para-Methoxymethylamphetamine (PMMA)
Substance identification
Chemically, PMMA (para-methoxymethylamphetamine) is 1-(4-methoxyphenyl)
-N-methylpropan-2-amine. PMMA has two enantiomers and is commonly
available as the racemic mixture.

Previous review
PMMA has not been previously reviewed by the Committee. A critical review
was proposed based on information brought to WHO’s attention that PMMA is
clandestinely manufactured, poses a risk to public health and society, and has no
recognized therapeutic use by any Party.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
PMMA is a substituted phenethylamine, being a methoxy-derivative of
methamphetamine. Methamphetamine is a Schedule II substance under the
1971 United Nations Convention on Psychotropic Substances. PMMA is also
related to para-methoxyamphetamine (PMA) which is a Schedule I substance
under the 1971 United Nations Convention on Psychotropic Substances. PMA
is a metabolite of PMMA. At high doses, PMMA can produce sympathomimetic
stimulation; its central stimulation is weak, and is weaker than PMA,
amphetamine, methamphetamine and MDMA. Overall, the actions of PMMA
observed in animals and human users strongly suggest a dominant role for
serotonergic activity.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
PMMA has been shown to lack amphetamine-like or hallucinogen-like stimulus
properties in animals in drug discrimination studies, but produces MDMA-like
discriminative stimulus effects. Indeed, its use and abuse (first noted in the late
1980s) has been associated with the MDMA “ecstasy” culture for which it is often
sold as an undisclosed substitute. Use and abuse of PMMA has subsequently been
reported worldwide, but particularly in Europe as well as in Asia and Canada. Its
use has been associated with deaths that have been increasing with time (1990s,
1 death; 2000s, 40 deaths; and 2010s, 90 deaths). At high doses of PMMA, some
of the effects of MDMA such as stimulation and euphoria are produced. Owing
to the slow onset of effects, the user expecting MDMA-like effects may assume
that the dose is too low and re-dose, which has been a defining feature of deaths
involving PMMA.

Therapeutic usefulness
PMMA has no reported use in medical practice. There are no marketing
authorizations (existing, ongoing or suspended) for PMMA.

Recommendation
The Committee considered that the effects of PMMA are similar to PMA, a
drug listed in Schedule I of the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971,
and the degree of risk to public health and society associated with its abuse is
especially serious. The Committee also noted it has no recorded therapeutic use.
The Committee considered that the evidence of its abuse warranted its placement
under international control and recommended that PMMA be placed in Schedule
I of the 1971 Convention.

5.1.7     Methoxetamine (MXE)
Substance identification
Chemically, methoxetamine (MXE) is 2-(ethylamino)-2-(3-methoxyphenyl)
cyclohexanone. It is a synthetic drug and belongs to the arylcyclohexylamine
class, like phencyclidine. Methoxetamine has two enantiomers and is commonly
available as the racemic mixture.

Previous review
During its thirty-sixth meeting, the WHO ECDD discussed the critical review
report on methoxetamine and concluded that owing to the insufficiency of data
regarding dependence, abuse and risks to public health, methoxetamine should not
be placed under international control at that time, but be kept under surveillance.
In 2014, the European Union decided to bring methoxetamine under control
after a risk assessment by the EMCDDA. Furthermore, new information on its
abuse potential and more reports of fatal and non-fatal intoxications warranted a
critical review at the thirty-seventh meeting of the ECDD.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Methoxetamine binds to the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) glutamate receptor
similar to ketamine and phencyclidine, but unlike ketamine it also binds
to the SERT. It is possible that inhibition of SERT may contribute to both its
psychopharmacological profile and its increased risk of toxicity compared to
ketamine.
        While methoxetamine is classified within the same pharmacological class
as PCP and ketamine, its reported effects appear to differ from those of ketamine,
suggesting that its actions in the brain may overlap with, but are not the same
as, those of ketamine. In addition, the methoxetamine doses that produce the
expected and toxic effects overlap, making this compound particularly dangerous.

Dependence potential
No dependence studies have been conducted with methoxetamine. Information
from user websites is suggestive. One user reported craving, an escalation in
dosage, and feelings of being “detached and sad” during abstinence, but apparently
had no withdrawal signs indicative of physical dependence.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
In nonclinical studies, methoxetamine produces conditioned place preference
in rats comparable to the effect of ketamine, and is self-administered, but not
robustly, suggesting some potential for abuse. Clinical abuse liability studies have
not been conducted. Information from other official sources is not available.
Some inferences can be made from information on user websites. Desired
psychological and behavioural effects reported on such websites include:
euphoria, empathy, pleasant intensification of sensory experiences, mild to
strong sense of dissociation from the physical body, de-realization, improved
social interaction, distorted sense of reality and vivid hallucinations. A total of
120 non-fatal intoxications and 22 deaths associated with methoxetamine have
been reported. Methoxetamine use has been reported from an increasing number
of countries including: Austria, Belgium, Canada, Estonia, Finland, France, Italy,
the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Russian Federation, Singapore, Spain, Sweden,
Ukraine, The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States.

Therapeutic usefulness
There is no evidence that methoxetamine is used therapeutically.

Recommendation
Methoxetamine has been shown to have effects similar to phencyclidine, a
compound listed in Schedule II of the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of
1971. The Committee considered that the degree of risk to public health and society
associated with the abuse liability of methoxetamine is substantial. The Committee
also noted it has no recorded therapeutic use. The Committee considered that the
evidence of its abuse warranted its placement under international control. The
Committee therefore recommended that methoxetamine be placed in Schedule
II of the 1971 Convention.

6.1.1     Etizolam (INN)
Substance identification
Chemically, etizolam is 4-(2-chlorophenyl)-2-ethyl-9-methyl-6H-thieno[3,2-f]
[1,2,4]triazolo[4,3-a][1,4]diazepine.

Previous review
The ECDD reviewed etizolam for the first time at its twenty-sixth meeting in
1989. At that time, the Committee rated the abuse liability of etizolam as moderate
and the therapeutic usefulness as moderate to high. In view of the lack of clear-
cut abuse, and of public health and social problems associated with its use, the
Committee was unable to come to a decision concerning the scheduling of
etizolam and recommended that a decision be deferred until its twenty-seventh
meeting.
        At its twenty-seventh meeting in 1990, the Committee again rated the
abuse liability of etizolam as low to moderate and the therapeutic usefulness as
moderate to high. The Committee noted few public health and social problems
associated with its use at that time and considered that the degree of seriousness
of these problems was not great enough to warrant international control.
Consequently, the Committee did not recommend scheduling of etizolam in
1990.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Etizolam has pharmacological effects similar to those of the model benzodiazepine,
diazepam that is in Schedule IV of the Convention on Psychotropic Substances
of 1971. It behaves as a full benzodiazepine receptor agonist and potentiates the
gamma-amino butyric acid (GABA)-induced chloride current, induces muscle
relaxation, has anti-convulsive effects, potentiates sleep time, causes a loss of the
righting reflex, and occasions the pentobarbital discriminative stimulus, similar
to diazepam. In contrast to diazepam, etizolam decreases the turnover and
inhibits the uptake of NE in the mouse brain.

Dependence potential
Few human data are available regarding the dependence potential of etizolam. In
case reports, one woman was able to be tapered off etizolam without experiencing
withdrawal symptoms; in another case, a man was unable to stop etizolam use
and during abstinence he experienced withdrawal symptoms characteristic of
benzodiazepine withdrawal (palpitations, impaired sleep, agitation and tremors).

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
In nonclinical studies, etizolam completely occasions the pentobarbital
discriminative stimulus in rhesus monkeys similar to diazepam. This suggests that
etizolam would have subjective effects similar to those of the sedative hypnotics
and thus is likely to share their abuse potential. In a Japanese psychiatric hospital
survey on drug-related psychiatric disorders, the number of etizolam-abusing
patients was 120, followed by flunitrazepam (101), triazolam (95) and zolpidem
(53 patients) out of a total of 1579 cases, suggesting that the abuse potential
of etizolam is relatively high. There appear to be no data directly pertinent to
the nature and magnitude of the public health problems related to the misuse,
abuse and dependence potential of etizolam nor any available data regarding its
illicit manufacture and trafficking. However, several publications in the medical
literature have commented that etizolam abuse has become a serious problem in
Japan, and in September 2014, The Blue Ridge Poison Centre (VA, USA) called
etizolam an emerging drug of concern and observed that there is an upward
trend in calls to United States poison control centres and in Internet searches
regarding this drug.

Therapeutic usefulness
Etizolam has marketing authorizations as a medicinal product in India, Italy and
Japan. It is not listed in the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines. In contrast to
diazepam and many other benzodiazepines, it decreases the turnover and inhibits
the uptake of NE in mouse brain, which may provide anti-depressant activity in
addition to conventional benzodiazepine-like anxiolytic activity, but apart from
this potential property, it appears that it has no exceptional therapeutic advantages.

Recommendation
Based on the evidence available regarding dependence, abuse and risks to
public health, the Committee recommended that a critical review of etizolam is
warranted for a future meeting. The Committee noted deficiencies in information
and suggested several potential sources that could be helpful in the preparation of
the critical review, including those from traffic accident reports, seizure data, user
forums, and pharmacovigilance data.

6.1.2     Phenazepam
Substance identification
Chemically, phenazepam is 7-bromo-5-(2-chlorophenyl)-1,3-dihydro-2H-1,4-
benzodiazepin-2-one.

Previous review
Phenazepam has not been previously reviewed by the Committee.

Similarity to known substances and effects on the central nervous system
Phenazepam belongs to the 1,4-benzodiazepines, the same family to which
diazepam, oxazepam and temazepam belong, and it has a structural resemblance
to diazepam, which is in Schedule IV of the Convention on Psychotropic
Substances of 1971. Phenazepam and its metabolite, 3-hydroxyphenazepam,
bind to the benzodiazepine binding site on the GABAA receptor. In laboratory
animals, phenazepam shows many in vivo effects typical of benzodiazepines,
including suppression of locomotor activity at moderate to high doses, induction
of myorelaxation and anticonvulsant activity, and it can induce sleep. In humans,
phenazepam exhibits many of the effects of a sedative.

Dependence potential
In laboratory animals, phenazepam can induce tolerance, and discontinuation
of its administration can result in withdrawal effects indicative of physical
dependence. Withdrawal signs, measured as an increase in the score of the
Hamilton Anxiety Scale following discontinued administration of phenazepam,
have been reported in one study.

Actual abuse and/or evidence of likelihood of abuse
User reports from Internet websites indicate that phenazepam may be used to
enhance the euphoric effects of opioids (for example, to “boost” methadone doses),
to alleviate withdrawal or abstinence syndromes (such as between heroin doses),
to temper cocaine highs, and to augment the effects of alcohol. Unauthorized
use of phenazepam has been reported over the past few years in Finland, New
Zealand, Norway, Turkey, Russian Federation, Sweden, the United Kingdom and
the USA. Effects such as psychomotor impairment, respiratory arrest, psychotic
experiences, delirium, overdose and deaths have been reported, as well as driving
under its influence. Phenazepam can be directly purchased from the Internet and
has been sold as a powder, as tablets, and spiked in blotters similar to lysergic acid
diethylamide (LSD).

Therapeutic usefulness
Phenazepam has been in clinical use since 1978, primarily in the Russian
Federation, to treat epilepsy, insomnia and alcohol withdrawal syndrome, for
short-term treatment of anxiety disorders (panic attacks), and as premedication
prior to surgery, as it enhances the effects of anaesthetics while reducing anxiety.

Recommendation
The Committee undertook a pre-review of the substance and considered that
the information provided in the pre-review report was sufficient and indicated
that dependence and harm caused by phenazepam was of such magnitude that
proceeding directly into critical review within the meeting was warranted. All
procedural requirements for a critical review, including two peer reviews, were
fulfilled. Phenazepam has been shown to have effects similar to diazepam that
is in Schedule IV of the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971. The
Committee considered that the degree of risk to public health and society
associated with the abuse of phenazepam is smaller but is still a significant risk
to public health compared to substances in Schedules I–III and has a therapeutic
usefulness from little to great. The Committee considered that the evidence of
its abuse warranted its placement under international control. The Committee
further recommended that phenazepam be placed in Schedule IV of the 1971
Convention.
